                                                                                   FOB 2021-017
    FOM 722-06J       1 of 3     RIGHTS OF CHILDREN IN FOSTER CARE
                                                                                        8-1-2021


OVERVIEW

                      Children in out-of-home placement can be their own best advocate
                      if they have a full understanding of the system. When government
                      and private agencies are entrusted with their care, it is critical that
                      every effort be made to assure their safety and well-being, which
                      includes taking steps to fully inform children and youth about their
                      care and provide them with opportunities to express their wishes.

REVIEW AND
DISTRIBUTION

                      The DHS-5307, Rights and Responsibilities for Children and Youth
                      in Foster Care, must be used to inform youth in out-of-home
                      placements, including abuse/neglect, juvenile justice, and dual
                      wards, of their rights and responsibilities.

 Initial Discussion
 and Review

                      Within 30 calendar days of removal, the caseworker must review
                      and explain the DHS-5307, Rights and Responsibilities for Children
                      and Youth in Foster Care, and the agency's grievance policy with
                      the child, foster parents, caregivers, and parents. The caseworker
                      must be prepared to answer any questions the child, parents, and
                      caregivers may have.

                      After the document is reviewed the signatures of the child and
                      caseworker must be obtained. The parent or caregiver must sign on
                      behalf of the child, if the child is younger than 11 years old or is
                      unable to sign the document. The caseworker must complete the
                      information on the last page of the document with the applicable
                      contact information and provide all participants with a signed copy
                      and upload a copy to MiSACWIS.

 Ongoing
 Discussion and
 Review

                      The DHS-5307 may be used as a tool during the monthly home
                      visit to facilitate ongoing discussions with the child about their rights
                      while in foster care. The caseworker must be available to discuss
                      with the child when they express curiosity or concern about their
                      rights. The rights are to be discussed in an age-appropriate
                      manner.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                              STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                 FOB 2021-017
   FOM 722-06J       2 of 3     RIGHTS OF CHILDREN IN FOSTER CARE
                                                                                      8-1-2021


 Placement Change

                      When a child under age 11 or who is otherwise unable to sign the
                      DHS-5307 changes placement, the caseworker must review the
                      DHS-5307 and the agency's grievance policy with the new
                      caregiver and obtain their signature on the DHS-5307 within 30
                      days of the placement change.

                      Note: Placement changes do not require a new DHS-5307 if the
                      youth is over age 11 and was able to sign the most recent DHS-
                      5307.

 Documentation

                      The DHS-5307 must be reviewed and re-signed annually. The
                      caseworker must document the review in the social work contacts,
                      and the caseworker must upload the DHS-5307 to the Documents
                      hyperlink in MiSACWIS.

 Concerns/
 Grievance Process

                      The caseworker must provide a copy of the supervising agency's
                      grievance policy to the child, parent, or caregiver, with the DHS-
                      5307, at the initial discussion and annually thereafter.

                      If a child, parent, or caregiver expresses concern about a child's
                      rights, the caseworker and/or supervisor must assist in resolving
                      those concerns. If a consensus is not reached, the caseworker
                      must assist the child, parent, or caregiver in following the agency's
                      grievance procedure.

                      If the agency is unable to resolve the concerns, the child, parent, or
                      caregiver can contact the MDHHS Office of Family Advocate at
                      517-241-9894.

LEGAL BASE
  Federal

                      Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act,
                      P.L. 113-183

                      Section 113 of this act requires case plans for all children 14 years
                      of age and older to include a document that describes the rights of
                      the child with respect to education, visitation, health, court
                      participation, staying safe, and avoiding exploitation and a signed
                      acknowledgement by the child that the child has been provided with


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2021-017
   FOM 722-06J       3 of 3     RIGHTS OF CHILDREN IN FOSTER CARE
                                                                                      8-1-2021


                      a copy of the document and that the rights have been explained to
                      the child in an age-appropriate way.

                      Section 111 of this act establishes standards for normalcy for a
                      child who is in the custody of the state and includes a reasonable
                      and prudent parent standard and normalizing activities for children
                      which are expressed through the foster child bill of rights. Licensed
                      foster homes and Child Caring Institutions are to parent under the
                      Reasonable and Prudent Parent Standard.

 State

                      Foster Care and Adoption Services Act, 1994 PA 203, MCL
                      722.953 et seq.

                      Establishes certain standards for foster care and adoption services
                      for children and their families. Prescribe powers and duties of
                      certain state agencies and departments and adoption facilitators.

POLICY CONTACT

                      Questions about this policy item may be directed to the Child
                      Welfare Policy Mailbox.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
