                                                                                 FOB 2022-021
    FOM 722-06B      1 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                      8-1-2022


OVERVIEW

                      The family team meeting (FTM) is an essential component of
                      MiTEAM, and Michigan’s Child Welfare Practice Model. FTMs
                      serve as the primary forum for safety planning, collaborative service
                      planning, service identification, and assessing progress. The FTM
                      represents a child-centered, family-driven, strength-based, team-
                      guided approach, designed to engage families in developing plans
                      for the safety, permanency, and well-being of their children and
                      family.

                      FTMs should include child welfare staff, parents, caretakers, foster
                      parents, children, youth, and may also include extended family,
                      friends, neighbors, community-based service providers, community
                      representatives, tribal representatives, for Native American
                      children, or other professionals involved with the family.

                      During the FTM, participants work together to create a plan for
                      safety, placement, and permanency tailored to the individual needs
                      of each child. This process provides a forum to share ideas and
                      opinions and stresses the importance of the family’s perspective
                      and involvement. In addition, this process encourages full
                      participation of all participants, honest communication, and
                      promotes dignity and respect.

DEFINITIONS

                      Family Team Meeting (FTM): A deliberate and structured
                      approach to involving children, families, and caregivers in case
                      planning through a facilitated meeting of family and their identified
                      supports.

                      Child Protective Services (CPS) Case Opening: When the
                      department has determined a preponderance of evidence exists
                      that a person responsible for a child’s health or welfare is also
                      responsible for abuse/neglect of that child. Safety and risk are
                      assessed, and a service plan is developed.

                      Court Intervention: When the department requests in-home court
                      jurisdiction or placement in out-of-home care.

                      Case Closure: The process of ending agency involvement with a
                      family or child.

                      Family Story: A specific account of the family’s functioning and
                      history from their perspective.



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                  FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B       2 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                       8-1-2022


                      Pre-Meeting Discussion: A planned discussion in which the case-
                      worker initiates a detailed discussion about the process of an FTM.

                      Safety Plan: Is a set of preventive measures developed to ensure
                      steps are put into place to maintain the safety of the child(ren). Situ-
                      ations where a safety plan is required include, but are not limited to:

                      •    Unsupervised parenting time.
                      •    Sibling on sibling violence.
                      •    Domestic violence.
                      •    Sexual abuse.
                      •    Parental history of causing injury through physical discipline.
                      •    Substance abuse of parent or child.
                      •    Mental illness of parent or child.
                      •    Suicidal behavior of parent or child.
                      •    High-risk behavior of a child.
                      •    Reunification.
                      •    Safe sleep measures for children aged 12 months and
                           younger.
                      •    Age-appropriate behavior management plans.

                      Action Plan: Is a clear and specific plan that addresses immediate
                      needs by outlining support for the child and family.

                      Transition Plan: Is a plan that addresses the needs of the child
                      during placement or placement change.

                      Visitation Plan: Is a specific plan that addresses parent/child con-
                      tact.

FAMILY TEAM
MEETING
PROTOCOL

                      Case planning is a cooperative effort in which the child and family’s
                      strengths and needs are assessed in partnership with the family,
                      caseworker, and other team members. FTMs are held to facilitate
                      this process, which involves developing a road map for moving chil-
                      dren to permanence promptly, while also addressing safety and
                      well-being. The Michigan Family Team Meeting Protocol has
                      identified all required steps that must be accomplished during the
                      FTM.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                              FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B       3 of 18            FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                   8-1-2022


 Caseworker's
 Guide to Pre-
 Meeting
 Discussions and
 Family Team
 Meetings

                      The DHS-1107, A Caseworker's Guide to Pre-Meeting Discussions
                      and Family Team Meetings, is a tool that provides details for how to
                      facilitate a successful and interactive pre-meeting discussion and
                      FTM. The DHS-1107, A Caseworker's Guide to Pre-Meeting
                      Discussions and Family Team Meetings, is to be reviewed prior to
                      conducting pre-meeting discussions and FTMs.

 Coordinating
 Multiple FTMs

                      When appropriate, different types of FTMs may be combined to
                      address multiple case management activities. Each meeting must
                      be documented in the electronic case management record using
                      the FTM hyperlink and all of the appropriate forms must be
                      completed for each type of meeting.

                      Example: The case plan reassessment FTM may also include
                      permanency goal review at six months in care and permanency
                      goal change.

 Types and
 Timeframes

                      FTMs must occur within the required time frames as outlined in the
                      following tables:




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                          STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                               FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B       4 of 18              FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                    8-1-2022




                                                   CPS

                  Type                                   Time Frame

              Case Opening      Within 30 calendar days before or 14 calendar days after
              (ISP)             case opening.

              Open/Close        Prior to disposition.

              Case Plan    Within 30 calendar days before the case plan due date.
              Reassessment
              (USP)

              Court             Within seven business days of the date of the preliminary
              Intervention      hearing.

              Case Closure      Within 30 calendar days before case closure or one
                                business day after unplanned court ordered dismissal.

              Request by        Within 14 calendar days of the request date.
              Family




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                               FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B        5 of 18          FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                    8-1-2022




                                          FOSTER CARE

                       Type                            Time Frame

                 Case Plan        Initial Case Plan (ISP) - within 30 calendar days
                 Development/     before the case plan due date.
                 Reassessment                                  Note: This FTM may be
                                                               combined with the CPS
                                                               Case Opening (ISP)
                                                               FTM.

                                  Updated Case Plan (USP) - within 30 calendar days
                                  before the case plan due date.

                                  Permanent Ward Service Plan (PWSP) - within 30
                                  calendar days before the case plan due date.

                 Permanency       Within 30-calendar days from the date the child has
                 Goal Review at   been in care for six months.
                 Six Months in
                 Care

                 Permanency       Within 30 calendar days before the date of the goal
                 Goal Change      change.

                 Placement        At least three business days prior to a planned
                 Preservation/    change of placement or no later than three business
                 Disruption       days after an unplanned placement change.
                                  Planned and unplanned placement changes include
                                  reunification, placement in a residential setting, step-
                                  down from a residential or hospital setting, return
                                  from AWOLP, or request for change in foster
                                  home/relative placements.

                 Semi-Annual      Within 30 calendar days after the child’s 14th
                 Transition       birthday and every six months thereafter.
                 Meeting          For children entering out-of-home placement at age
                                  14 or older, the semi-annual transition meeting must
                                  be held within 30 calendar days of the removal date;
                                  see this item for specific meeting requirements.



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                          STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                             DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                  FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B         6 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                       8-1-2022




                                              FOSTER CARE

                       Type                               Time Frame

                  90-Day              Children age 16 or older must have a 90-Day
                  Discharge           Discharge Planning meeting within 90 calendar days
                  Planning            before dismissal or within 30 calendar days after an
                  Meeting             unplanned court dismissal; see this item for specific
                                      meeting requirements.

                                      Youth in Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care
                                      (YAVFC) must have a Discharge Planning Meeting
                                      within three business days of discovery that YAVFC
                                      eligibility requirements are not being met.

                  Case Closure        Within 30 calendar days before the case closure
                                      date or one business day after unplanned court
                                      ordered dismissal.

                  Request by          Within 14 calendar days of the request date.
                  Family


SEMI-ANNUAL
TRANSITION
MEETING

                        Beginning at age 14, semi-annual transition meetings must occur
                        once every 180-calendar day to discuss a child’s permanency goal
                        and identify supportive adults.

                        Note: For youth participating in Young Adult Voluntary Foster
                        Care; see FOM 722-16, Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care, for
                        specific requirements that must be addressed during the meeting.

 Case Plan Team
 Members

                        Children may select up to two adults, who are not the child's foster
                        parent/caregiver or caseworker, to be a part of their case planning
                        team. The team members' role is to be the child’s advisor and
                        advocate for their permanency, wellbeing, and normalcy, through
                        the application of the Rights and Responsibilities of Children and
                        Youth in Foster Care; see FOM 722-06J, Rights of Children in


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                 FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B       7 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                      8-1-2022


                      Foster Care. The team member will assist the child in developing
                      their case plan by participating in semi-annual transition meetings.
                      Case planning team members must be invited to each semi-annual
                      transition meeting.

                      The supervising agency may reject an individual selected by a
                      child, at any time, if the supervising agency has compelling cause
                      to believe that the individual would not act in the best interests of
                      the child. The caseworker must document the reasons for rejecting
                      an individual chosen by the child, in the case service plan.

                      Additional Participants

                      Additional participants in the semi-annual transition meeting should
                      include all persons the child identifies as supportive; it is not meant
                      to be a one-on-one meeting with the child. Participants may include
                      but are not limited to the following:

                      •    Foster parents.
                      •    Biological parents.
                      •    Relatives.
                      •    Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA).
                      •    Permanency Resource Monitor (PRM).
                      •    Lawyer guardian ad litem (L-GAL).
                      •    Michigan Youth Opportunities Initiative (MYOI) coordinator.
                      •    Therapists.
                      •    The child’s friends.
                      •    School staff.
                      •    Employers.
                      •    The child's supportive adult(s), if applicable.
                      •    Tribal representatives for Native American children.
                      •    Anyone the child considers to be a support person.
 DHS-901, Semi-
 Annual Transition
 Plan Report

                      The DHS-901, Semi-Annual Transition Plan Report, must be
                      updated to reflect progress toward goals during each meeting.
                      Once completed, the DHS-901, Semi-Annual Transition Plan
                      Report, becomes the child’s transition plan. A copy of the DHS-901,
                      Semi-Annual Transition Plan Report, must be given to the child and
                      all individuals responsible for assisting the child. The original plan
                      must be uploaded into the electronic case management record.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                  FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B       8 of 18              FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                       8-1-2022


                      Note: Progress toward the child’s goals must also be documented
                      in all case service plans.

                      The meeting must cover all areas identified in the DHS-901, Semi-
                      Annual Transition Plan Report, including but not limited to:

                      •    Housing.
                      •    Supportive relationships.
                      •    Independent living skills.
                      •    Education.
                      •    Employment.
                      •    Transportation.
                      •    Monetary management skills.
                      •    Review of the child’s credit report.
                      •    Emotional/mental/physical health.
                      •    Substance abuse.
                      •    Participation in age and developmentally appropriate activities.
                      •    Other areas that will assist the child in successfully
                           transitioning from foster care.

                      During the meeting, the following must be identified:

                      •    Goals for each area.
                      •    One or more supportive adults assisting the child in achieving
                           each goal.

                      Note: The DHS-901, Semi-Annual Transition Plan Report, is
                      completed in lieu of the DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report.

 Coordinating
 Multiple FTMs

                      If another FTM is held within 30-days of the required semi-annual
                      transition meeting, the meetings may be combined to address all
                      identified areas. Each meeting must be documented in the
                      electronic case management record using the FTM hyperlink and
                      all of the appropriate forms must be completed for each type of
                      meeting.

90-DAY DISCHARGE
PLANNING

                      All children transitioning out of foster care at the age of 16 or older
                      must have a 90-day discharge plan in place, which must be devel-
                      oped prior to the child’s exit from care. The discharge plan is
                      established during the 90-day discharge planning meeting. The


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                              STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B       9 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                     8-1-2022


                      meeting is held for all children exiting foster care, regardless of
                      permanency goal. A child’s foster care program type should not
                      be closed until the 90-day discharge planning meeting occurs.

                      Note: For youth participating in Young Adult Voluntary Foster
                      Care, see FOM 722-16, Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care, for
                      specific requirements and time frames.

                      The discharge plan must be child-driven and the child must be
                      involved in every aspect of the plan development. This meeting
                      must include the child’s support network; it is not meant to be a
                      one-on-one meeting with the child. The child's [two] case planning
                      team members and any additional participants that the child
                      identifies must be invited to the 90-day discharge planning meeting;
                      see Case Plan Team Members in this item.

 DHS-902, 90-Day
 Discharge Plan
 Report

                      The DHS-902, 90-Day Discharge Plan Report, must be completed
                      during this meeting. A copy is to be given to the child and any indi-
                      viduals responsible for assisting the child. The original plan must be
                      uploaded into the electronic case management record. The DHS-
                      902, 90-Day Discharge Plan Report, addresses the following areas:

                      •    Housing.
                      •    Health insurance.
                      •    Education.
                      •    Mentors/supportive adults.
                      •    Continuing support services.
                      •    Workforce/employment services.
                      •    Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care; see FOM 722-16, Young
                           Adult Voluntary Foster Care.

                      Note: The DHS-902, 90-Day Discharge Plan Report, is completed
                      in lieu of the DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report.

 Coordinating
 Multiple FTMs

                      If the 90-day discharge planning meeting is held concurrently with
                      any other type of FTM, each meeting must be documented in the
                      electronic case management record using the FTM hyperlink and
                      all of the appropriate forms must be completed for each type of
                      meeting.


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                   FOB 2022-021
    FOM 722-06B     10 of 18              FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                        8-1-2022


FTM FACILITATION

                      FTMs must be facilitated by the assigned caseworker with the fol-
                      lowing exceptions:

                      •   Federal requirements mandate a neutral facilitator for a
                          YAVFC youth's semi-annual transition meeting.

                          Note: A neutral facilitator is a person without case
                          management responsibility of either the child or the parents
                          who are the subject of the review.

                      •   Caseworker and supervisor determine there is a safety
                          concern.

                      Note: If it is determined that the meeting is to be facilitated by
                      another individual, the supervisor must assist in coordinating and
                      identifying another facilitator. The name of the identified facilitator
                      must be documented in social work contacts and must have
                      completed the FTM training.

MULTIPLE AGENCY
INVOLVEMENT

                      When multiple agencies are providing services to the family and/or
                      child, the agency with family responsibility is required to collaborate
                      and involve all other child placing agencies involved with the family
                      in all FTMs.

                      If a placement preservation/disruption FTM is needed, the agency
                      providing services to the child must include the agency with family
                      responsibility in the FTM.

PARENT/
CAREGIVER
PARTICIPATION

                      Parent/caregiver participation in a pre-meeting discussion or FTM is
                      voluntary. If a parent/caregiver declines to attend or participate in
                      the pre-meeting discussion or FTM, the meeting must proceed with
                      other participants in attendance. If no other participants are identi-
                      fied, the caseworker and supervisor must proceed with a case con-
                      ference to assess and plan for the child’s safety, permanency, and
                      well-being.

                      The caseworker must make active efforts to engage the parent or
                      caregiver in the FTM process until case closure. Engagement


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                              STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                               FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      11 of 18            FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                    8-1-2022


                      efforts and a parent’s denial of participation must be documented in
                      the case service plan.

INCARCERATED
PARENT
PARTICIPATION

                      When a parent is incarcerated, the caseworker must complete the
                      following activities:

                      •   Provide and document notice of the FTM to the incarcerated
                          parent by mail or telephone.

                      •   Contact the facility and request permission for the parent to
                          participate in the FTM by telephone.

                      •   If time allows, send a copy of the DHS-1105, Family Team
                          Meeting Report, and ask the parent to sign and return it.

                      •   Notify the parent’s attorney of the meeting.

                          Note: The attorney must be allowed to attend.

                      •   Send the incarcerated parent a copy of the DHS-1105, Family
                          Team Meeting Report, and document the date the report was
                          sent in social work contacts.

                      Caseworkers must provide prior notice to an incarcerated parent for
                      the following FTMs only:

                      •   Court Intervention.
                      •   Change in permanency goal.
                      •   Return home.

                      If circumstances permit, agencies may arrange for an incarcerated
                      parent’s participation in other types of FTMs.

CHILD AND YOUTH
PARTICIPATION

                      All children aged 11 or older should be invited and allowed to
                      attend FTMs. The caseworker must evaluate, on a case-by-case
                      basis, whether attendance would be harmful to a child’s safety or
                      well-being. If the child is not invited, the reasons must be
                      documented in the narrative section of the DHS-1105, Family Team
                      Meeting Report, and the case plan.



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      12 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                     8-1-2022


                      Note: For children younger than 11 years old, the caseworker, and
                      their supervisor may determine if it is appropriate for the child to
                      attend all or a portion of the FTM.

SECURITY

                      The caseworker must discuss any security needs and safety con-
                      cerns prior to the FTM to ensure adequate security at the meeting
                      site. Family members may be excluded if they pose a credible
                      safety threat to the group or if attendance would violate a personal
                      protection order, no contact-bond, probation, parole, or other court
                      order. In some of these cases, a telephone conference must be
                      explored.

                      All participants must be provided with security information, when-
                      ever a FTM will include the attendance of a family member with a
                      known history of violent or threatening behavior.

DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE CASES

                      In domestic violence cases, if the batterer is present, arrangements
                      must be made to ensure the non-offending parent’s and child’s safe
                      arrival and departure from the meeting location. If a personal
                      protection order mandates that the parties must not come in
                      contact, the possibility of a telephone conference must be explored,
                      if not in violation of the court order. The caseworker and their
                      supervisor must carefully evaluate a decision to exclude a parent.
                      Additionally, the caseworker and supervisor should evaluate the
                      child’s attendance based on safety.

CONFIDENTIALITY

                      The confidentiality of information shared at the FTM must be
                      addressed. Privacy and respect are emphasized, but participants
                      must be informed that information from the meeting may be used
                      for case planning, in subsequent court proceedings if necessary,
                      and in the investigation of a new allegation of abuse or neglect
                      should such information arise. The caseworker must explain
                      confidentiality and mandated reporting to all participants as it
                      pertains to the FTM.

                      The confidentiality statement identified on the DHS-1105, Family
                      Team Meeting Report, the DHS-901, Semi-Annual Transition Plan
                      Report, and the DHS-902, 90-Day Discharge Plan Report, allows
                      the parent(s)/child to give permission for specific information
                      regarding their case to be discussed for the purpose of the FTM. If

CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      13 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                     8-1-2022


                      a participant refuses to sign the report, the meeting will continue.
                      Staff must be fully aware that specific information as outlined in
                      SRM 131, Confidentiality, is not open for discussion unless the
                      participant reveals the confidential information or signs the release
                      of information.

FTM PRACTICE
GUIDANCE

 Documentation

                      The DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report, is used to capture
                      family demographics, FTM logistical information, needs, strengths,
                      action steps, safety concerns and the safety plan, and any recom-
                      mendations made for the family during the FTM. The DHS-1105,
                      Family Team Meeting Report, must be completed for every FTM.

                      Exception: The DHS-902, 90-Day Discharge Plan Report, and the
                      DHS-901, Semi-Annual Transition Plan Report, are completed in
                      lieu of the DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report; see Semi-
                      Annual Transition Meeting and 90-Day Discharge Planning in this
                      item.

 Participants

                      The caseworker must encourage parents and children to identify
                      and invite support persons they would like to attend; see Additional
                      Participants in this item for suggestions.

                      Note: Tribal representatives for Indian Children must be invited
                      regardless of the parent’s preference.

                      Once the FTM is scheduled, the caseworker must coordinate
                      efforts to invite participants to the meeting. Notification of the
                      purpose, date, time, and place of the meeting can be provided by
                      any reasonable method including mail, telephone, or verbal
                      notification.

                      Note: If the caseworker has made reasonable efforts to notify a
                      participant, a FTM may be held without the attendance of a
                      participant.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      14 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                     8-1-2022


 Prior to the FTM

                      Pre-Meeting Discussion

                      The purpose of the pre-meeting discussion allows the parent, child,
                      and/or caregiver to have an active role in planning and facilitating
                      the FTM. The family’s first pre-meeting discussion with the
                      assigned caseworker must occur in person; subsequent pre-
                      meeting discussions may occur in person or by telephone. The pre-
                      meeting discussion must be held prior to the FTM and must be
                      documented in the social work contacts within the electronic case
                      management record. The MDHHS-Pub-1160, A Family's Guide to
                      Pre-Meeting Discussions and Family Team Meetings, is available
                      to help educate families on the case planning process. The
                      MDHHS-Pub-1160, A Family's Guide to Pre-Meeting Discussions
                      and Family Team Meetings, should be distributed to case members
                      during the first pre-meeting discussion.

 Location

                      If safety permits, the FTM may take place at the parent, child,
                      and/or caregiver’s home or a community site. FTMs must be held at
                      the local MDHHS or placement agency office when safety or
                      security concerns arise, or a participant’s special needs must be
                      accommodated.

 Date and Time

                      FTMs may need to be held during nontraditional work hours that
                      will accommodate family and essential participants. Notification of
                      the purpose, date, time, and place of the meeting can be provided
                      by any reasonable method including mail, telephone, or verbal
                      notification by either the caseworker or family.

 Special Needs/
 Reasonable
 Accommodations

                      To promote the safety, well-being, and successful participation of
                      all participants, the caseworker must identify and assist in resolving
                      barriers to participants’ attendance at the FTM before it takes place.
                      Reasonable accommodations must be provided when inviting indi-
                      viduals with special needs. A participant’s special need may include
                      but is not limited to the following.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      15 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                     8-1-2022


                      Transportation

                      The caseworker must explore transportation options with families
                      who identify this as a barrier.

                      Childcare

                      The caseworker must explore available childcare options with the
                      family in order to support all primary caretakers’ attendance at the
                      FTM. If a need is identified, the caseworker must assist the care-
                      giver with childcare arrangements prior to the meeting.

                      Adaptations

                      The caseworker must explore available options when a family
                      member needs additional assistance in order to participate. These
                      may include but are not limited to, a foreign language interpreter,
                      interpreter for the hearing-impaired, wheelchair access, or phone
                      access for an incarcerated parent.

                      For information on non-discrimination in service delivery; see Non-
                      Discrimination in Service Delivery.

                      For information about securing a foreign language interpreter; see
                      APF 113, Interpreter and Translator Services.

                      For information on interpreters for the deaf, deafblind, or hard of
                      hearing; see Deaf & Hard of Hearing Applicant Accommodations.

 During the FTM

                      The caseworker must assist the FTM team members in the comple-
                      tion of the following stages as appropriate:

                      •   Welcome & Introduction.

                                Purpose of meeting.
                                Agenda items.
                                Non-negotiable(s).
                                Identify desired outcomes.
                                Confidentiality.
                                Ground rules.
                                Family story.
                                Explanation of charting.

                      •   Identification of the family’s strengths and needs/concerns.

                                FTM members will identify the family’s strengths.


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                               FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      16 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                       8-1-2022


                                FTM members will identify the family’s concerns/needs.

                                Throughout the meeting, the FTM members must address
                                how needs/concerns are connected to the desired
                                outcomes.

                                FTM members will address strengths that will help the
                                family achieve the desired outcome.

                      •   Brainstorming.

                                FTM members are given the opportunity to contribute
                                solutions to address needs/concerns.

                      •   Plan Development.

                                Safety Plan: the safety plan must include proactive and
                                reactive steps to address specific behavioral concerns and
                                must meet all requirements outlined in the glossary of this
                                item.

                                Action Plan: an action plan is required at the conclusion
                                of each meeting; the plan must define goals, identify the
                                approach that will be used to achieving those goals, and
                                describe measures to accomplish the goals.

                                Transition Plan: the transition plan is created when
                                movement of a child occurs and must meet all
                                requirements outlined in FOM 722-03, Placement
                                Selection and Standards.

                                Visitation Plan: the visitation plan must be discussed and
                                documented prior to the conclusion of an FTM. The
                                visitation plan must meet all requirements outlined in FOM
                                722-06I, Maintaining Connections: Parenting Time, Sibling
                                Visitations, and Contact.

                      •   Recapping.

                                Each FTM member must be aware of any steps they are
                                to take and the timeline in which the steps must be
                                completed to support the family in achieving the desired
                                outcome(s).

                                Charting: the caseworker must chart during the process of
                                the FTM so all participants can identify the
                                strengths/needs concerns.


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                               FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      17 of 18            FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                    8-1-2022


                                The DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report, must be
                                completed at the conclusion of the FTM.

 Post Family Team
 Meeting

                      Following the FTM, the caseworker is responsible for the following:

                      •   Completing the DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report,
                          checking it for accuracy, identifying areas needing follow-up,
                          and recording the outcome data.

                      •   Providing the DHS-1105, Family Team Meeting Report, to all
                          participants (in person and by phone), legal parents, and
                          casework supervisor. These documents must also be uploaded
                          into the electronic case management record.

                      The caseworker must enter the FTM information in the electronic
                      case management record using the FTM hyperlink within seven
                      business days of the FTM.

                      Note: The caseworker's supervisor must review activities assigned
                      to the caseworker during monthly case consultations. Assigned
                      activities and any resolution must be documented in the parent
                      agency treatment plan.



LEGAL BASE

                      Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions
                      Act of 2008, 42 USC 620 et seq

                      During the 90-day period immediately prior to the date on which the
                      child will attain 18 years of age provide the child with assistance
                      and support in developing a transition plan that is personalized at
                      the direction of the child.

                      Periodic reviews for voluntary foster youth extending until age 21
                      are completed during the semi-annual transition meeting. A neutral
                      person without case management responsibility must facilitate the
                      FTM.

                      Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act,
                      Public Law 113-183

                      Youth in foster care who are ages 14 and older are allowed to help
                      develop their own case plan – and any revision to the plan – and

CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2022-021
   FOM 722-06B      18 of 18             FAMILY TEAM MEETING
                                                                                     8-1-2022


                      are able to select up to two individuals who are not a foster parent
                      or caseworker to be a part of their case planning team.

POLICY CONTACT

                      Questions about this policy item may be directed to the Child
                      Welfare Policy Mailbox (Child-Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov).




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
