
OVERVIEW

                      To support the safety, permanency, and well-being of a child in
                      foster care, placement decisions must take into consideration the
                      following four principles:

                      •    Ensuring the child's safety.

                      •    Minimizing the trauma experienced by the child and family
                           during the placement process.

                      •    Maintaining continuity by placing the child with relatives and in
                           their community whenever possible.

                      •    Placing the child in the most family-like setting that will meet
                           the child's needs, reducing the likelihood of future placement
                           changes.

                      All factors outlined in this policy item must be evaluated to ensure
                      the selected placement is safe and, in the child's best interest.
                      Depending on the circumstances in each case and the specific
                      needs of each child, certain factors should be given more weight
                      than others. In no case is any one factor to be given sole
                      consideration.

NON-
DISCRIMINATION IN
FOSTER CARE AND
ADOPTION
PLACEMENTS

                      Except for American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) children, case
                      managers may not routinely consider race, national origin, and
                      ethnicity in making placement decisions; see NAA 200,
                      Identification of an Indian Child. Any consideration of these factors
                      must be done on an individualized basis and only when
                      circumstances indicate their consideration is warranted; see SRM
                      403, Non-discrimination in Foster Care and Adoption Placements.

 American
 Indian/Alaska
 Native Children

                      Case managers must follow NAA 215, Placement/Replacement
                      Priorities for Indian Children, for children who are identified as
                      AI/AN or when there is reason to believe the child is AI/AN.
                      Documentation of each placement of an AI/AN child has must be




                      maintained in the case service plan to show the efforts to comply
                      with placement priorities.

PARENT
INVOLVEMENT

                      Whenever possible and appropriate, parents should be included in
                      the following placement discussions and decisions:

                      •    The parents and the case manager must discuss all possible
                           options, such as placement with relatives, licensing of a friend
                           or relative to serve as a caregiver, or other known options. If
                           foster care with a licensed home is selected, the parents
                           should be made aware of available homes and should help
                           select the one that best meets the child's needs.

                      •    When selecting the best available placement for a child, the
                           case manager must discuss all placement selection criteria
                           with the parents. The parent's opinion and recommendations
                           regarding the importance of each criterion should be given
                           considerable weight, but the final decision remains with the
                           department.

                      •    Once a preference by the case manager and parents is
                           established, the case manager must attempt to facilitate that
                           placement. If necessary, an emergency or temporary
                           placement for up to 30-calendar days may be used while a
                           long-term placement is explored or arranged.

                      •    At the time of placement or placement change or during the
                           applicable family team meeting (FTM), and regularly
                           throughout the duration of the placement, the case manager
                           should facilitate contact between the parents and caregivers to
                           orient the caregivers to the specific needs and characteristics
                           of the child.

                           •    Information about medications, allergies, cultural
                                practices, food preferences, temperament, sleep
                                schedules, special or personal toys, books or clothing that
                                will aid in a smooth transition, and other specifics about
                                the child should be shared with the caregivers.

                           •    In the best interest of the child, the case manager should
                                encourage the caregivers to meet with the parents to
                                facilitate an ongoing exchange of information about the
                                child.




                           •    To the extent possible and appropriate, the caregivers and
                                parents should have phone access to each other and
                                should consult with each other about routine care,
                                milestones, major decisions, and any concerns that arise.

PLACEMENT
SELECTION
CRITERIA

                      The following factors must be considered when making a
                      placement or placement change:

                      •    The child's physical, emotional, and safety needs.

                      •    The least restrictive, most family-like setting.

                      •    Placement with relative.

                      •    Placement with siblings.

                      •    The child's expressed preferences.

                      •    Proximity to the child's family.

                      •    The child's and family's religious preference.

                      •    The continuity of relationships.

                      •    The case plan which includes the goal of permanence.

                      •    Appropriateness of the child's current educational setting and
                           proximity to the school in which the child is enrolled at the time
                           of removal.

                      •    Availability of placement resources for the purpose of timely
                           placement.

 Needs of Child

                      When making a placement decision the child's needs are of the
                      greatest importance. Placement selection must be based on the:

                      •    Physical, emotional, and safety needs of the child.
                      •    Accessibility and availability of services needed for the child.
                      •    Appropriateness of the child's current educational setting and
                           the proximity to the school the child is enrolled in at the time of
                           removal.




 Least-Restrictive
 Setting

                      Placement must be made in the least-restrictive, most family-like
                      setting consistent with the best interests and special needs of the
                      child.

                      The non-offending parent must be assessed for placement before
                      considering an out-of-home placement; see FOM 722-01, Entry into
                      Foster Care.

                      If reunification is the permanency goal then a return home must be
                      assessed as the first option anytime a placement change is
                      considered; see FOM 722-03D, Placement Change.

 Relatives

                      If out-of-home placement is required, preference must be given to
                      placement with relatives or siblings; see FOM 722-03B, Relative
                      Engagement and Placement.

                      Note: For placement preference, a relative is defined as an
                      individual who is at least 18 years of age and related to the child
                      within the fifth degree by blood, marriage, or adoption, including the
                      spouse of an individual related to the child within the fifth degree,
                      even after the marriage has ended by death or divorce, the parent
                      who shares custody of a half-sibling, and the parent of a man whom
                      the court has found probable cause to believe is the putative father
                      if there is no man with legally established rights to the child. A
                      relative may also be an individual who is a least 18 years of age
                      and not related to a child within the fifth degree by blood, marriage,
                      or adoption but who has a strong positive emotional tie to or role in
                      the child's life or the child's parent's life if the child is an infant, as
                      determined by the department or, if the child is an Indian child, as
                      determined solely by the Indian child's tribe. As described under
                      MCL 712A.13a.

                      Placement preference must be given to an adult related to the child
                      within the fifth degree by blood, marriage, or adoption provided the
                      relative meets all relevant state child protection standards. The
                      department can override this decision with good cause.

                      Good cause means the following:

                      •    A request by one or both of the child's parents to deviate from
                           this preference.





                      •    The child's request, if the child is of sufficient age and capacity
                           to understand the decision that is being made.

                      •    The presence of a sibling attachment that can be maintained
                           through a particular placement.

                      •    The child's physical, mental, or emotional needs, such as
                           specialized treatment services that may be unavailable in the
                           community where families who meet the placement
                           preferences live.

                      •    The distance between the child's home and the proposed
                           family placement would frustrate the reunification goal or
                           otherwise impede permanency.

 Sibling Groups

                      Siblings are defined as children who have one or more parents in
                      common. The relationship can be biological or through adoption,
                      and includes siblings as defined by the Indian child’s tribal code or
                      custom. A sibling relationship continues after termination of
                      parental rights. All siblings in out-of-home placement must be
                      placed together, unless:

                      •    One of the siblings has exceptional needs that can be met only
                           in a specialized program or facility.

                      •    Such placement is harmful to one or more of the siblings.

                      •    The size of the sibling group makes one placement impractical,
                           despite diligent efforts to place the siblings within the same
                           home.

                      The DHS-3, Sibling Placement Evaluation, is required if a new child
                      is born into a home where one or more siblings are currently in
                      foster care and the new child will remain in the home. The DHS-3,
                      Sibling Placement Evaluation, must be approved by the CPS
                      supervisor, foster care supervisor, and the second line supervisor.
                      The DHS-3, Sibling Placement Evaluation, must document how the
                      children remaining in the home are safe and the plan of services for
                      the family to maintain safety of the children in the home.

                      The case manager must document the reasons siblings cannot be
                      placed together in the applicable service plan. Written second line
                      supervisory approval is required for a placement which separates
                      or maintains separation of siblings.





                       A placement exception request (PER) is required for each
                       placement which separates or maintains separation of siblings; see
                       FOM 722-03E, Placement Exception Requests and Approvals.

                       For information on foster home license capacity or rule variance;
                       see FOM 922, Foster Family Recruitment, Support and
                       Development.

                       Ongoing Efforts to Place Siblings Together

                       Case managers must make ongoing efforts to place siblings
                       together unless the placement would be contrary to the safety or
                       well-being of any of the siblings. Efforts to place siblings together
                       must continue until case closure. A reassessment of the sibling split
                       placement is required each quarter and must include the efforts and
                       progress made to place all siblings together. The reassessment
                       must be documented in the electronic case record in the case
                       service plan under supporting information.

                       Note: Termination of parental rights does not dissolve a child's
                       relationship to their siblings. Efforts to place siblings who are in out-
                       of-home care together must continue as described above after
                       termination of parental rights.

                       Sibling Placement after Adoption

                       Although not required, best practice suggests efforts be made to
                       identify biological siblings who may have been adopted by
                       reviewing prior case records and documenting information about
                       biological siblings in the child’s foster care case file. Placement and
                       visitation are not required but are encouraged when the adoptive
                       parent is interested in placement or visitation; see SRM 131,
                       Confidentiality.

                       Stepsibling Placement

                       Efforts should be made, but are not required, to place stepsiblings
                       together. A sibling split PER is not required when stepsiblings are
                       placed apart.

 Child’s Preference

                       The case manager must discuss and document the placement
                       preferences of the child when age appropriate. Consideration must
                       be given to the child’s preference. If the child is not consulted, the
                       case manager must document the reason within the case service
                       plan.




 Proximity to the
 Child’s Family

                       Children must not be placed outside of a 75-mile radius of the
                       home from which the child entered custody, unless one of the
                       following exceptional circumstances arise:

                       •    The child’s needs are so exceptional that they cannot be met
                            by a family or facility within a 75-mile radius.

                       •    The child requires a placement change and the child’s
                            permanency goal is reunification with the child's parents who at
                            that time reside outside of the 75-mile radius.

                       •    The child is to be placed with a relative or sibling outside of the
                            75-mile radius.

                       •    The child is to be placed in a pre-adoptive or adoptive home
                            outside of the 75-mile radius.

                       If the child is placed outside the 75-mile radius, the supervisor must
                       approve the placement; see FOM 722-03E, Placement Exception
                       Requests and Approvals.

 The Child’s and
 Family’s Religious
 Preferences

                       The case manager must consider parental wishes and the child's
                       feelings and desires whenever possible in selecting a placement
                       which affords the child an opportunity for expression of the child's
                       religious, spiritual, and cultural beliefs and practices.

 Continuity of
 Relationships

                       The case manager must consider a placement which preserves
                       and maintains relationships with the relative network, prior service
                       providers, friends, teachers, or other significant relationships.

 Permanency Plan

                       The case manager must consider the placement's ability to support
                       the child's permanency plan and concurrent plan, if applicable; see
                       FOM 722-07, Permanency Planning- Overview. Every placement
                       should be chosen with the long-term plan for the child in mind.





                       Minimum Number of Placements

                       The placement selection should minimize the number of place-
                       ments for the child. Whenever possible, the initial placement should
                       become the ongoing placement for the child with the potential for
                       permanency if needed.

                       Child's Previous Placement History

                       Placement history, including informal and formal placements,
                       should be considered when selecting an ongoing placement. The
                       relationship with the previous caregivers should be considered.
                       Prior placements may indicate a need for prompt action to achieve
                       permanence, a need for more or less structure, the child's inability
                       to relate to parental figures, an ability or willingness to relate to
                       specific caregivers, or other important considerations. These
                       conditions may provide important information when evaluating the
                       ability of a placement to meet the needs of the child and support
                       timely permanence.

 Appropriateness of
 the Educational
 Setting

                       Children entering foster care or changing foster care placements
                       must continue their education in the school district of origin
                       whenever possible and if in the child’s best interest. The case
                       manager must consider proximity of the placement to the child’s
                       school when placing or changing a child’s placement; see FOM
                       723, Educational Services.

 Availability of
 Placement
 Resources for
 Purposes of
 Timely Placement

                       The case manager must consider which available placement is
                       safe, best meets the child's needs, and is in the child's best
                       interest.






CURRENT
CIRCUMSTANCES
OF POTENTIAL
PLACEMENT

                      Once a potential placement is identified, the case manager must
                      assess the family's ability to meet the needs of the specific child
                      and any extra demands of an additional child in the home. Case
                      managers must consider the factors described below and
                      document that the factors were considered.

                      If any factors exist that may impact the caregiver's ability to meet
                      the child's needs, the case manager must include a narrative
                      justification in the placement section of the case service plan that
                      explains why the placement is in the child's best interest despite
                      any identified factors. The narrative must include any needs
                      identified by or for the caregivers and the agency's plan for
                      addressing those needs.

 Number, Ages, and
 Needs of Children

                      Case managers must consider the ability of the caregivers to
                      provide quality care and an appropriate level of supervision given
                      the number, ages, and needs of the children living in the home and
                      any children being considered for placement in the home.

 Caregiver Support
 Systems

                      The case manager must consider the caregiver's support system,
                      such as family, friends, or community supports, and their ability to
                      assist during times of need. The case manager must assess the
                      caregiver's participation in trainings, support groups, or mentoring
                      programs that will assist the caregiver in meeting the specific needs
                      of the child considered for placement.

 Parenting
 Difficulties

                      The case manager must consider any identified parenting concerns
                      or difficulties the caregivers may have recently experienced with
                      other children in the home, including truancy or delinquency issues,
                      mental or physical health concerns, or behavioral problems. If there
                      have been parenting concerns in the past, the case manager must
                      also consider the previously demonstrated ability to resolve and
                      manage the situation. If there are ongoing parental stressors in the



                      home, the case manager must consider the potential impact of
                      placing an additional child in the home prior to making the
                      placement.

 Significant
 Changes or
 Stressors

                      The case manager must consider significant changes, stressors, or
                      personal or financial difficulties recently experienced by the
                      caregivers that may affect the capacity to care for the child being
                      considered for placement.

 Complaints

                      Prior to placement, case managers must review the electronic case
                      record or consult with Children’s Protective Services (CPS) and
                      foster home licensing staff to determine if any complaints have
                      been received on the potential caregiver's home. If complaints have
                      been received, the case manager must assess whether the
                      circumstances of the complaint raise any concerns about the ability
                      of the caregivers to care for the child being considered for
                      placement.

 Health and Age

                      The case manager must consider the age and health status of the
                      caregivers when determining their ability to provide permanency for
                      the child and meet the child’s current and ongoing needs.

                      The health and age of the prospective caregivers should be given
                      heightened consideration if:

                      •   The prospective caregiver is under the age of 21.

                      •   The youngest child to be placed is less than 10 years of age
                          and there is more than 50 years age difference between the
                          child and the youngest prospective caregiver.

PLACEMENT
LIMITATIONS

                      Case managers must not routinely make placements that will result
                      in any of the following situations:

                      •   More than three foster children placed in the home.





                      •   More than five total children residing in the home, including the
                          caregiver’s children.

                      •   More than three children under the age of three residing in the
                          home.

                      •   Placement of a child more than 75 miles from the home from
                          which the child entered custody; see Proximity to the Child’s
                          Family in this item.

                      •   Siblings placed apart; see Sibling Groups in this item.

                      •   Any child in foster care identified as at high risk for perpetrating
                          physical violence or sexual assault against other children being
                          placed with other children in foster care not so determined; see
                          Placement of a Child Identified with High-Risk Behaviors in this
                          item.

                      •   Placement in an emergency shelter care program for more
                          than 30 days; see Placement in Emergency Shelter Care
                          Programs in this item.

                      •   Placement in an emergency shelter care program more than
                          once in a 12-month period; see Placement in Emergency
                          Shelter Care Programs in this item.

                      •   Placement in a jail, correctional, or detention facility; see
                          Placement in Jail, Correctional, or Detention Facilities in this
                          item.

                      •   Placement in a home with an adjudicated juvenile sex offender;
                          see Placement in a Home with a Child Adjudicated for a Sex
                          Offense in this item.

                      Exceptions to these limitations may be made on an individual basis
                      when extenuating circumstances exist and it is determined to be in
                      the best interest of the child; see FOM 722-03E, Placement
                      Exception Requests and Approvals.

 Prohibited
 Placements

                      Secure Juvenile Justice Facilities

                      Children must not be placed in a secure juvenile justice child caring
                      institute (CCI) without a conviction for a non-status offense crime.





                      Felony Convictions

                      Children must not be placed within the home if any household
                      member or non-parent adult has a felony conviction for any of the
                      following crimes:

                      •   Child abuse or neglect.

                      •   Spousal abuse.

                      •   Crime against children, including pornography.

                      •   Crime involving violence, including rape, sexual assault, or
                          homicide, but not including other physical assault or battery.

                      •   Physical assault, battery, or drug-related offense within the last
                          five years.

                      If the criminal history check reveals any member of the household
                      has a criminal conviction, case managers must follow the
                      guidelines in SRM 700, Law Enforcement Information Network
                      (LEIN).

PLACEMENT
PREPARATION

                      Preparation for placement will vary with each child and must be
                      adapted to their age, development, experience, individual needs,
                      personality, and circumstances necessitating placement, as well as
                      any issues presented by the prospect of placement.

                      The case manager must prepare the child for placement by
                      discussing the following using developmentally appropriate
                      language:

                      •   Reasons for placement.

                      •   Visitation plan with parents and siblings, if applicable.

                      •   Expected length of placement.

                      •   Expectations about maintaining ties to significant others.

                      •   Child's feelings, fears, and questions.

                      •   Clothing, pictures, toys, or other items the child would like to
                          take.





                      •   When available, a description of the placement and caregivers,
                          which may include photographs.

                      •   Any other questions or concerns raised by the child.

                      Note: If the placement is not planned, the case manager must
                      discuss the above with the child at the time of placement or as
                      close to placement as possible.

                      When a child is too young to discuss placement, the case manager
                      must prepare the caregivers to meet the child’s needs. Placement
                      preparation activities may include, but are not limited to, informing
                      the caregivers of the child’s:

                      •   Sleeping schedule.
                      •   Formula and feeding schedule.
                      •   Medical needs.
                      •   Emotional needs.

                      See Infants and Young Children, in this item, for special con-
                      siderations when placing this population.

 Electronic Case
 Management
 Documentation

                      The case manager must document placement preparation in the
                      electronic case record in the Placement Details section and
                      Placement Change hyperlink.

DOCUMENTATION

                      For out-of-home placements, the following documentation
                      requirements apply.

 Provided to the
 Caregiver

                      Any time an out-of-home placement is made, the following
                      documents must be provided to the caregivers at or before the time
                      of placement:

                      •   Medical information.

                          •     DHS-3762, Consent to Routine, Non-Surgical Medical
                                Care and Emergency Medical/Surgical Treatment Card;
                                see FOM 801-04, Consent for Health Treatment and Care.




                          •     DHS-Pub-268, Guidelines for Foster Parents and
                                Relatives Caregivers for Health Care and
                                Behavioral/Mental Health Services.

                          •     Medicaid card or MA number; see FOM 803, Medicaid -
                                Foster Care.

                          •     Medicaid Health Plan (MHP) card, if applicable; see FOM
                                801-06, Medicaid Health Plan Services.

                          •     DHS-221, Medical Passport; see FOM 801-03, Medical
                                Passport, for exceptions to the standard of promptness
                                (SOP).

                                Note: The receipt of the medical passport must be
                                documented in the electronic case record by uploading the
                                signed and dated signature page into the child's Health
                                Profile.

                      •   Education information, including all of the child's available
                          student records, such as report cards or Individualized
                          Education Plans (IEPs); see FOM 723, Educational Services,
                          for exceptions to the SOP.

                      •   DHS-3307, Placement Outline and Information Record.

                          Note: For emergency placements, the DHS-3307, Placement
                          Outline and Information Record, may be provided within seven-
                          calendar days of placement.

                      Provided to the Unlicensed Relative Caregiver

                      When placement is made with unlicensed relative caregivers, the
                      caregivers must also receive the:

                      •   DHS-Pub-843, Foster Care Provider Payment Handbook.

                      •   DHS-Pub-114, Relative Caregiving: What You Need to Know,
                          case managers must document that this was given to the
                          caregivers in the social work contacts in the electronic case
                          management system; see FOM 722-03B, Relative
                          Engagement and Placement.






 Provided to the
 Child

                      Within 30-calendar day of removal, the case manager must review
                      and explain the DHS-5307, Rights and Responsibilities for Children
                      and Youth in Foster Care, and the agency's grievance policy with
                      the child, the caregivers, and the child's parents; see FOM 722-06J,
                      Rights of Children in Foster Care.

 Completed by the
 Case Manager

                      The DHS-3377, Clothing Inventory Checklist, must be completed
                      within 30-calendar days of the child's placement or placement
                      change; see FOM 903-09, Case Service Payments.

                      If the child changes schools at the time of placement or
                      replacement, the case manager must request the child's records
                      using the DHS-942, School Notification and Education Records
                      Release; see FOM 723, Educational Services.

FOSTER CARE
PLACEMENT
DECISION NOTICE

                      The supervising agency must make a placement decision and
                      document the reason for the decision on the DHS-31, Foster Care
                      Placement Decision Notice, within 90 days of the child's removal.

                      If the supervising agency places a child with a relative and
                      approves the placement on the DHS-3130A, Relative Placement
                      Home Study, during the first 90-days the child is in care, then this is
                      the placement decision that must be recorded on the DHS-31,
                      Foster Care Placement Decision Notice; see FOM 722-03B,
                      Relative Engagement and Placement.

                      The case manager must provide the DHS-31, Foster Care
                      Placement Decision Notice, to the:

                      •   Child's attorney, guardian, and lawyer-guardian ad litem (L-
                          GAL), as applicable.

                      •   Prosecutor, MDHHS attorney, and supervising agency
                          attorney, as applicable.

                      •   Legal parents.





                      •    Attorneys for the child's parents.

                      •    Relatives who expressed an interest in caring for the child.

                      •    Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA).

                      •    Tribal government representative.

                      •    Child, if developmentally and age appropriate.

                      Note: If there is a safety concern, the case manager may redact
                      the child's current placement address.

 Requests for
 Specific Reasons
 for Placement
 Decisions

                      Any of the above, within five business days, may request in writing
                      the evidence used to support the placement decision on the DHS-
                      31, Foster Care Placement Decision Notice. The case manager
                      must explain the reason for the placement decision in writing within
                      10 business days of receiving the request. A person listed above
                      may ask the child's L-GAL to review the decision to determine if it is
                      in the child's best interest.

                      If the L-GAL determines the placement decision is not in the child’s
                      best interest, the L-GAL must petition the court within 14 business
                      days of the case manager’s decision. The court must commence a
                      review hearing on the record within seven business days after
                      receiving the petition.

PLACEMENT OF
SPECIAL
POPULATIONS

 Infants and Young
 Children

                      When removal from a parent’s home is being considered for an
                      infant or young child, the supervising agency must ensure
                      developmentally appropriate parent-child contact, family continuity,
                      stability in placement, and timely permanency. FTMs must be
                      utilized to gather information and discuss an infant’s development,
                      family connections and transition planning; see FOM 722-06B,
                      Family Team Meeting. When out-of-home placement is necessary,
                      an infant’s distress will be lessened if the new environment can be




                      made consistent with the old one. The transition to a new
                      caregiver's home should be facilitated by providing a child with
                      familiar objects from the removal home, such as:

                      •   Blanket.
                      •   Sheets.
                      •   Stuffed animal.
                      •   Pacifier.

                      These objects will provide a young child with a sense of continuity
                      and will help to minimize the trauma experienced during the
                      transition.

 Older Youth

                      For information on placement of older youth, independent living
                      preparation and placement, and placement in an adult foster care
                      facility, see FOM 722-03C, Older Youth: Preparation, Placement,
                      and Discharge.

 Placement of a
 Child Identified
 with High-Risk
 Behaviors

                      Any child in foster care determined by a clinical assessment to be
                      high risk for acting out physical violence or sexual assault against
                      other children cannot be placed in a foster family home with other
                      children without an appropriate assessment concerning the safety
                      of all children in the placement. The case manager must consider a
                      child’s history of physical violence and sexual assault when making
                      placement decisions.

                      High Risk Behavior Referral and Treatment

                      The case manager must refer a child with a history of physically or
                      sexually assaultive behaviors for an assessment with a licensed
                      clinician for mental health services within five business days of any
                      incidents of physically or sexually assaultive behavior. For children
                      receiving Medicaid, refer to the local Community Mental Health
                      (CMH) or MHP behavioral health providers.

                      The case manager must use information from the assessment to
                      assist in making placement decisions and referral for treatment.
                      Information from the MDHHS-5719, Trauma Screening Checklist
                      (Ages 0-5), or MDHHS-5720, Trauma Screening Checklist (Ages 6-
                      18), should also be considered; see FOM 802, Mental Health,



                      Behavioral and Developmental Needs of Children Under the
                      Supervision of MDHHS.

                      Initial Placement

                      When initially placing a child at high risk for perpetrating physical
                      violence or sexual assault, the case manager must assess the
                      child’s risk to other children in the home. A child in foster care who
                      demonstrates high risk behaviors may be considered for placement
                      with other children. Prior to placement, the case manager must
                      assess potential safety concerns for any child within the placement.
                      The case manager must assess the following factors for each child
                      in the placement:

                      •   The chronological, social, and developmental age.
                      •   History of victimization and victimizing others.
                      •   Mental and physical capacity.
                      •   The ability of the caregivers to provide the necessary
                          supervision to prevent the child from harming self or others.

                      Placement Change

                      If a child in foster care is determined to be at high risk for
                      perpetrating physical violence or sexual assault after initial place-
                      ment, the case manager must take into consideration the above
                      factors to help determine whether the child can safely stay in their
                      current placement.

                      Sibling Placements

                      Child safety must be the first consideration when making placement
                      decisions. If a child has a history of being physically or sexually
                      assaultive toward their siblings, that is a potential reason for
                      separating siblings in placement.

                      Consideration may be given to placing siblings together, if the child
                      does not pose a direct risk to their siblings, or to reuniting siblings
                      once the child’s behavior stabilizes and appropriate safety plans
                      can be put in place; see FOM 722-03E, Placement Exception
                      Requests and Approvals.

                      Safety Planning

                      When a child with high-risk behaviors is placed with other children,
                      the case manager must develop a safety plan with the caregivers
                      prior to or at the time of placement to ensure the safety of all
                      children in the home. The case manager must provide the




                      caregivers with a written copy of the safety plan. The case manager
                      must document the safety plan in the case service plan. This plan
                      must include details about the behaviors of concern and what
                      protecting interventions will be put into place. Safety plans must be
                      unique to the child and the placement.

                      Note: Protecting interventions are not meant to replace or be used
                      in lieu of a caregiver’s supervision and vigilance.

                      Documentation

                      The case manager must document the child's risk status in the
                      electronic case management system in the following locations:

                      •    The appropriate section of the Child Assessment of Needs and
                           Strengths (CANS); see FOM 722-09, Child Assessment of
                           Needs and Strengths (CANS).

                      •    The Health Needs and Diagnoses tab in the child's electronic
                           case record in the Health Profile.

                      Monitoring High Risk Status

                      If consideration is being given to changing the child’s risk status
                      and placement restrictions, the child’s therapist or other mental
                      health professional must be consulted, and they must determine
                      the child’s behavior has stabilized and does not present further risk
                      to other children in the home.

 Placement in a
 Home with a Child
 Adjudicated for a
 Sex Offense

                      Children must not be placed within the home if a juvenile adjudi-
                      cated as a sex offender lives in the home. Case managers must
                      inquire, prior to any placement, if a juvenile adjudicated for any sex
                      offenses lives in the home.

                      When a child in foster care lives in a home where a juvenile is
                      adjudicated as a sex offender after the child’s placement, the
                      following activities must occur:

                      •    A professional assessment completed by a master’s level or
                           higher clinician. The assessment must evaluate the likelihood
                           of reoccurrence of sexual offense and the safety of children in
                           the home.




                      •   Evaluation of the best interest of the child placed in the home,
                          as it pertains to placement. Consideration must be given to the
                          following:

                          •     Increased adult supervision.
                          •     Age of the child, the adjudicated juvenile, and the victim.
                          •     Child’s relationship with placement family.
                          •     Child’s length of time within the home.
                          •     The severity of the offense by the adjudicated juvenile.
                          •     Length of time since the most recent sexual offense.

                      •   Ensuring items that could potentially be used as weapons are
                          locked up or out of reach.

                      •   A written safety plan developed with the clinician, the
                          caregivers, and case manager.

                      •   Support or approval of the plan for the child to remain in the
                          home obtained from the court, legal parents or guardians, L-
                          GAL, and the foster care supervisor. The safety plan must be
                          signed by the clinician, caregivers, legal parents or guardians,
                          case manager, and supervisor and uploaded to the electronic
                          case management system. A copy of the safety plan must be
                          given to the caregivers.

                      The case manager must complete a high-risk PER; see FOM 722-
                      03E, Placement Exception Requests and Approvals.

PLACEMENT WITH A
PARENT

                      A parental home placement includes a child placed with any of the
                      following:

                      •   Custodial parent.
                      •   Non-custodial parent.
                      •   Adoptive parent, after the adoption is finalized.
                      •   Legal parents.
                      •   Out-of-state parental home.
                      •   Biological parents whose parental rights were previously
                          terminated.

                      If a child is placed with relative caregivers or court-ordered
                      unrelated caregivers and the child's parent resides in the home, this
                      is not considered a parental home placement unless the court
                      orders the child reunified with the parent.




                      Note: Once a child is placed out-of-home a signed court order is
                      needed prior to the child being placed in a parental home
                      placement.

 Parental
 Placement of an
 MCI Ward

                      In exceptional circumstances the Michigan Children's Institute
                      (MCI) superintendent may authorize placement of an MCI ward with
                      parents whose parental rights to the child were previously
                      terminated.

                      The case manager must consult with the MCI superintendent when
                      considering re-establishing a relationship between an MCI ward
                      and the child's former legal parents.

                      An MCI ward’s case manager may submit a request for placement
                      with the ward’s former legal parents if the permanency goals of
                      adoption, guardianship, and permanent placement with a fit and
                      willing relative have been ruled out.

                      Placement with the former legal parents is prohibited if:

                      •   The former legal parent's rights were terminated due to one of
                          the aggravated circumstances listed in MCL 722.638(1)(a) or
                          MCL 712A.19a(2)(b), including:

                          •     Abandonment of a young child.

                          •     Criminal sexual conduct involving penetration, attempted
                                penetration, or assault with intent to penetrate committed
                                against the child or a sibling.

                          •     Battering, torture or other severe physical abuse of the
                                child or a sibling.

                          •     Loss or serious impairment of an organ or limb of the child
                                or a sibling.

                          •     Life-threatening injury of the child or a sibling.

                          •     Murder or attempted murder of a sibling.

                          •     Voluntary manslaughter of a sibling.






                          •     Aiding and abetting, conspiring to commit, soliciting
                                murder or voluntary manslaughter of the child or a sibling.

                      •   The former legal parent has been convicted of an offense
                          against a minor as defined in Public Law 109-248, the Adam
                          Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006, including:

                          •     An offense, unless committed by a parent or guardian,
                                involving kidnapping.

                          •     An offense, unless committed by a parent or guardian,
                                involving false imprisonment.

                          •     Solicitation to engage in sexual conduct.

                          •     Use in a sexual performance.

                          •     Solicitation to practice prostitution.

                          •     Video voyeurism as described in 18 USC 1801.

                          •     Possession, production, or distribution of child
                                pornography.

                          •     Criminal sexual conduct involving a minor, or the use of
                                the Internet to facilitate or attempt such conduct.

                          •     Any conduct that by its nature is a sex offense against a
                                minor.

                      Requests for restoration of physical custody must be made on the
                      DHS-594, Parental Placement of MCI Ward Request, which must
                      be submitted to the address below along with the required
                      supporting documentation:

                                Michigan Children’s Institute
                                235 S. Grand Ave, Suite 514
                                Lansing, MI 48909
                                FAX: 517-335-6177

                      Release of Information for Supporting Documentation

                      Documents authored by MDHHS, or on behalf of MDHHS by a
                      placement agency foster care (PAFC) provider, CCI, or prosecutor
                      that may be provided to MCI after proper redaction without a signed
                      release include:





                      •   Foster care case service plans.
                      •   Family assessments of needs and strengths (FANS).
                      •   Reunification assessments.
                      •   CPS investigation reports.
                      •   Petitions.

                      See SRM 131, Confidentiality, for redaction requirements.

                      MCI Superintendent Review and Decision

                      The MCI superintendent will review the DHS-594, Parental
                      Placement of MCI Ward Request, and supporting documentation. If
                      the MCI superintendent concludes placement with the former legal
                      parents is in the child’s best interest, the MCI superintendent will
                      send written approval to the requesting case manager. The case
                      manager may then place the child with the former legal parents.
                      The case manager must comply with replacement procedures in
                      FOM 722-03D, Placement Change, when placing the child with the
                      former legal parents. Agency responsibility for supervision
                      continues until dismissal of court jurisdiction.

                      If the request is denied, the MCI superintendent will send a written
                      denial to the requesting case manager.

                      Documentation in the Electronic Case Management System

                      If the MCI superintendent approves placement with the former legal
                      parents, when the placement is entered into the electronic case
                      management system, the case manager must select parental home
                      as the service type and parental rights terminated as the living
                      arrangement.

                      Youth may be eligible for an independent living allowance when
                      placed with the former legal parents. If the youth is approved for an
                      independent living stipend while placed with the former legal
                      parents, the case manager must select independent living as the
                      service type and independent living allowance as the service
                      description when entering the youth's placement.

COURT-ORDERED
PLACEMENTS WITH
UNRELATED
CAREGIVERS

                      The supervising agency must not place a child with an unrelated
                      caregiver unless the unrelated caregiver is licensed, or the court
                      orders the placement. The court may order placement under the



                       Juvenile Code (MCL 712A.13a[5]) which allows court wards to be
                       placed with a legal custodian in an unlicensed placement.

                       Note: An unrelated caregiver does not meet the definition of
                       relative.

 With MDHHS
 Recommendation

                       The following conditions must be met for placement with an
                       unrelated caregiver when the placement is recommended by
                       MDHHS:

                       •    Completion of the MDHHS-5770, Relative Placement Safety
                            Screen, and DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home Study,
                            prior to making the placement recommendation; see FOM 722-
                            03B, Relative Engagement and Placement.

                            •    The DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home Study, must
                                 be renewed annually.

                       •    The MDHHS county director or local office designee must
                            review and approve the MDHHS-5770, Relative Placement
                            Safety Screen, and DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home
                            Study, prior to the placement recommendation.

                       •    The court must approve the placement and issue an order
                            finding the “conditions of custody at the placement and with the
                            individual with whom the child is placed are adequate to
                            safeguard the child from the risk of harm to the child’s life,
                            physical health, or mental well-being.”

                       •    The case manager must refer the family for licensing within
                            one business day of the child's court-ordered placement.

 Without or Against
 MDHHS
 Recommendation

                       If the court orders the placement without or against MDHHS'
                       recommendation, the following conditions must be met:

                       •    The court must approve the placement and issue an order
                            finding the “conditions of custody at the placement and with the
                            individual with whom the child is placed are adequate to
                            safeguard the child from the risk of harm to the child’s life,
                            physical health, or mental well-being.”




                      •   Completion and approval of the MDHHS-5770, Relative
                          Placement Safety Screen, and DHS-3130A, Relative
                          Placement Home Study, within 30 days of placement; see
                          FOM 722-03B, Relative Engagement and Placement.

                          •     The MDHHS-5770, Relative Placement Safety Screen,
                                and DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home Study, must
                                be reviewed and approved by the county director or local
                                office designee.

                          •     The DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home Study, must
                                be renewed annually; see FOM 722-03B, Relative
                                Engagement and Placement.

                          Note: Approval of the MDHHS-5770, Relative Placement
                          Safety Screen, or the DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home
                          Study, does not denote approval of the placement; it
                          documents approval of the placement recommendation.

                      •   If the caregiver chooses to become licensed, the case
                          manager must refer the family for licensing within one business
                          day of the caregiver's request.

RESIDENTIAL AND
EMERGENCY
SHELTER CARE
PROGRAMS

                      Federal guidelines require that children in out-of-home care be
                      placed in the least-restrictive, most family-like setting. Residential
                      and emergency shelter care programs must be used only for
                      children with specialized mental or behavioral health needs and
                      only for as long as clinically necessary.

 Placement in a
 Residential Care
 Program

                      Placement in a residential care program may be considered after
                      all the following criteria have been met:

                      •   The child’s needs cannot be met in a less-restrictive
                          placement.

                      •   The program provides programming and services that meet the
                          child's specific needs.





                      •    All community resources have been exhausted.

                      •    The program is the least restrictive placement to meet the
                           child’s needs.

                      Prior to placement in a residential care program, the case manager
                      must:

                      •    Conduct an FTM to determine:

                           •    The child's treatment needs.

                           •    Whether alternate support services and safety plans can
                                be implemented to maintain the child in the community.

                      •    Receive final approval on a residential PER; see FOM 722-
                           03E, Placement Exception Requests and Approvals.

 Placement in
 Emergency Shelter
 Care Programs

                      Emergency shelter care programs are used for children who are
                      unable to be placed in a more permanent placement due to at least
                      one of the following reasons:

                      •    The child has significant behaviors or other mental health
                           needs at removal that require a comprehensive assessment to
                           assist with determining an appropriate placement.

                      •    The child has an identified placement, but the placement is not
                           immediately available.

                      •    The child has a documented severe need on the Mental Health
                           and Well-Being domain of the CANS within the past 90 days
                           and requires a comprehensive assessment to determine
                           appropriate placement.

                      •    The child has repeated placement instability and a thorough
                           assessment is needed to make a stable placement.

                      Children must not be placed in an emergency shelter care program
                      for more than 30-calendar days or more than once in a 12-month
                      period unless circumstances exist that allow for an exception; see
                      FOM 722-03E, Placement Exception Requests and Approvals.






 Children Under
 Ten Years of Age

                      The Children's Services Administration (CSA) executive director
                      must approve placement of children less than 10 years of age in an
                      emergency shelter care program or residential care program; see
                      FOM 722-03E, Placement Exception Requests and Approvals.

 Children Under
 Thirteen Years of
 Age

                      The Business Service Center (BSC) director must approve
                      placement of a child at least 10 years of age but under the age of
                      13 in a residential care program; see FOM 722-03E, Placement
                      Exception Requests and Approvals.

 Inpatient
 Psychiatric
 Hospitalization

                      Requests for Emergency Admission

                      The parent, legal guardian, or person in loco parentis of a child in
                      foster care may request emergency admission of the child to a
                      psychiatric hospital if there is reason to believe:

                      •    The child is a minor requiring treatment as defined in MCL
                           330.1498b, and

                      •    The minor presents a serious danger to self or others.

                      A court order is not required.

                      Note: Person in loco parentis includes the department or its
                      designee, which may be a PAFC provider, CCI, foster parent, or
                      caregiver.

                      The request must be made to a hospital or preadmission screening
                      unit of the Community Mental Health Services Program (CMHSP)
                      in the county where the child lives.

                      If it is determined that emergency admission is not necessary, a
                      child may still be admitted to a psychiatric hospital as described
                      below.






                      Requests for General Admission

                      A child in foster care may be admitted to a psychiatric hospital in
                      the following circumstances:

                      •   For MCI wards, the department requests hospitalization.
                      •   For temporary court wards, the department may request
                          hospitalization of the ward if the department is specifically
                          empowered to do so by a court order.

                      Suitable for Hospitalization

                      The hospital or CMHSP admissions unit must determine whether
                      the child is suitable for hospitalization as defined in MCL
                      330.1498c:

                      •   The child is a minor requiring treatment in a hospital as defined
                          in MCL 330.1498b:

                          •     A minor with a substantial disorder of thought or mood that
                                significantly impairs judgment, behavior, capacity to
                                recognize reality, or ability to cope with the ordinary
                                demands of life.

                          •     A minor having a severe or persistent emotional condition
                                characterized by seriously impaired personality
                                development, individual adjustment, social adjustment, or
                                emotional growth, which is demonstrated in behavior
                                symptomatic of that impairment.

                      •   The child needs hospitalization and is expected to benefit from
                          hospitalization.

                      •   An appropriate, less restrictive alternative to hospitalization is
                          not available.

                      A child must not be determined to be a minor requiring treatment
                      solely based on the following conditions:

                      •   Epilepsy.

                      •   Developmental disability.

                      •   Brief periods of intoxication caused by substances such as
                          alcohol or drugs or by dependence upon or addiction to those
                          substances.





                         •    Juvenile offenses, including school truancy, home truancy, or
                              incorrigibility.

                         •    Sexual activity or trafficking history.

                         •    Sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.

                         •    Religious activity or beliefs.

                         •    Political activity or beliefs.

                         •    Immigration status.

                         The placement of any child in Medicaid-funded psychiatric facilities
                         requires a certification of need for the inpatient psychiatric services.
                         Either the local CMHSP, for elective admissions, or the psychiatric
                         hospital, for emergency and urgent admissions, will complete the
                         certification if Medicaid reimbursement is expected.

 Placement in Jail,
 Correctional, or
 Detention Facilities

                         Abuse or neglect wards or MCI (Act 220 and Act 296) wards must
                         not be placed in secure detention or jail unless:

                         •    A delinquency complaint or petition has been filed and the
                              judge has issued an order for detention.

                         •    An adult criminal charge has been issued and youth has been
                              detained in jail.

                         Upon receiving information that a child in foster care has been
                         detained and placed into a jail or detention facility, the case
                         manager must take the following action:

                         •    If a child in foster care is placed in jail or a detention center
                              without a delinquency charge and signed court order or adult
                              criminal charge, the case manager will move the child to a
                              foster care placement immediately but within no more than
                              within five-calendar days, unless the court orders otherwise
                              over the case manager’s objection.

                         •    If a child in foster care is placed in jail or a detention center
                              with a delinquency charge or adult criminal charge and the
                              court disposition is an order to return the child to foster care,
                              the case manager will move the child to a foster care




                          placement immediately but within no more than five-calendar
                          days, unless the court orders otherwise over the case
                          manager’s objection.

                      All activity and contacts must be documented in the case service
                      plan.

UNUSUAL INCIDENT
REPORTING

                      Immediately the foster parent or caregiver must notify the child
                      placing agency (CPA) of the following incidents:

                      •   A child is missing from a foster home; the foster parent or
                          caregiver must notify the CPA immediately after the child is
                          missing; see FOM 722-03A, Absent Without Legal Permission
                          (AWOLP).

                      •   Any serious illness or injury requiring hospitalization of a child
                          in foster care. The CPA must also report the incident to the
                          legal parent, or to the MCI superintendent for MCI wards.

                      •   A child’s involvement with law enforcement authorities.

                      •   Any attempted removal or removal of a foster child from the
                          foster home by any person who is not authorized by the CPA.

RESOURCES

                      •   DHS-Pub-268, Guidelines for Foster Parents and Relatives
                          Caregivers for Health Care and Behavioral/Mental Health
                          Services.

                      •   DHS-3307, Placement Outline and Information Record.

                      •   DHS-Pub-843, Foster Care Provider Payment Handbook.

                      •   DHS-Pub-114, Relative Caregiving: What You Need to Know.

                      •   DHS-5307, Rights and Responsibilities for Children and Youth
                          in Foster Care.

                      •   DHS-3377, Clothing Inventory Checklist.

                      •   DHS-942, School Notification and Education Records Release.

                      •   DHS-31, Foster Care Placement Decision Notice.




                      •   DHS-3130A, Relative Placement Home Study.

                      •   MDHHS-5719, Trauma Screening Checklist (Ages 0-5).

                      •   MDHHS-5720, Trauma Screening Checklist (Ages 6-18).

                      •   DHS-594, Parental Placement of MCI Ward Request.

                      •   DHS-1555-CS, Authorization to Release Confidential
                          Information.

                      •   MDHHS-5770, Relative Placement Safety Screen.

                      •   FOM 722-08A, Ongoing Case Service Plans.

                      •   FOM 722-08B, Permanent Ward Service Plan (PWSP).

                      •   FOM 722-08C, Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care (YAVFC)
                          Service Plan.

LEGAL AUTHORITY

 Federal Laws

                      Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions
                      Act of 2008, 42 USC 620 et seq.

                      Emphasizes preservation of sibling bonds by requiring the state to
                      make reasonable efforts to place siblings in the same placement.

                      Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006, 34 USC
                      20911 et seq.

                      Requires background checks before approval of any foster or
                      adoptive placement and to check National Crime Information
                      Databases and state child abuse registries. Defines specified
                      offenses against minors.

                      Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974, 42
                      USC 5601 et seq., as amended.

                      Prohibits placement of children in a secure juvenile justice
                      detention or correctional facility without a conviction for a non-
                      status offense.






 State Laws

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.13a

                      Definitions; sibling.

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.13b

                      Change in foster care placement.

                      Foster Care and Adoption Services Act, 1994 PA 203, as
                      amended, MCL 722.954a

                      Placement of child in supervising agency's care; determination of
                      placement with relative; notification; special consideration and pref-
                      erence to child's relative; documentation of decision; review
                      hearing.

                      Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.5131(5)(g)

                      Provides an exception to the strict rules of confidentiality required
                      for persons with HIV, AIDS, or other serious communicable
                      disease.

                      Michigan Children's Institute, 1935 PA 220, as amended, MCL
                      400.207

                      Provides the MCI superintendent the authority to restore parental
                      custody to the biological parent of an MCI ward if the parent has
                      established a suitable home and is capable and willing to support
                      the child.

                      Mental Health Code, 1974 PA 258, as amended, MCL 330.1498
                      et seq.

                      Allows for hospitalization of minors under certain conditions,
                      including by request of MDHHS. Defines minor requiring treatment
                      and suitable for hospitalization.

                      Modified Implementation, Sustainability, and Exit Plan,
                      Dwayne B. v. Whitmer, No. 2:06-cv-13548.

                      4.13 Placement Standards and Limitations, Policy (Commitment
                      13).

                      4.29 Placement in a Jail, Correctional Facility, or Detention
                      (Commitment 44).





                      6.5 Placement Standard (Commitment 43).

                      6.6 Separation of Siblings (Commitment 46).

                      6.7 Maximum Children in a Foster Home (Commitment 48).

                      6.8 Emergency or Temporary Facilities, Length of Stay
                      (Commitment 49).

                      6.9 Emergency or Temporary Facilities, Repeated Placement
                      (Commitment 50).

 Licensing Rule

                      Mich Admin Code, R 400.12404

                      Placement.

                      Mich Admin Code, R 400.12417

                      Foster parent information.

POLICY CONTACT

                      Direct questions about this policy to the Child Welfare Policy
                      Mailbox (Child-Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov).





