
OVERVIEW

                      Every reasonable effort must be made to maintain the stability of a
                      foster care placement. When it is necessary to move a child, the
                      original placement selection criteria and standards apply; see FOM
                      722-03, Placement Selection and Standards. A re-evaluation of the
                      placement selection criteria is required and must be documented in
                      the case service plan. The case manager must consider the
                      following placement options, in order, whenever a placement
                      change is necessary:

                      1.   If the child's permanency goal is reunification, the case
                           manager must recommend return home unless return to the
                           parent would cause a substantial risk of harm to the child's life,
                           physical health, or mental well-being.

                      2.   Placing the child with siblings or with a suitable relative if return
                           to the parental home cannot occur; see FOM 722-03B,
                           Relative Engagement and Placement for the definition of a
                           relative and relative placement preferences.

                      Exception: The placement change of an Indian child must follow
                      the established placement priorities in NAA 215,
                      Placement/Replacement Priorities for Indian Child(ren).

PLACEMENT
CHANGES FOR
INDIAN CHILDREN

                      The supervising agency, and the Michigan Children's Institute (MCI)
                      for MCI wards, must not change the placement of an Indian child as
                      defined by MCL 712B.3(k), or make a recommendation regarding a
                      change in placement, prior to notifying the Indian child's tribe.

                      The supervising agency must provide written notice to the child's
                      tribe, using the DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move,
                      by email or regular mail. Notice must be received by the tribe at
                      least three days prior to any planned placement change. The notice
                      must include:

                      •    A statement that the child is an Indian child.

                      •    A description of the active efforts taken by the supervising
                           agency to place the child within the prevailing social and
                           cultural standards of the Indian tribe or tribes in which the





                           parent or extended family resides or maintains social and
                           cultural ties.

                      •    How the proposed placement meets the social and cultural
                           standards above and the placement preferences in NAA 215,
                           Placement/Replacement Priorities for Indian Child(ren).

                      Exception: If the supervising agency must change the Indian
                      child's placement immediately due to the caregiver's refusal to
                      maintain the placement or suspected abuse or neglect by the
                      caregiver that places the child at substantial risk of harm, the
                      supervising agency must provide written notification to the child's
                      tribe immediately, no later than the following business day.

PLACEMENT
CHANGE REASONS

                      A child’s placement may not be changed prior to giving the
                      caregiver notice and opportunity to appeal the placement change
                      unless:

                      •    The foster parent or caregiver requests or agrees to the
                           placement change.

                      •    A contracted social services agency of a federally recognized
                           tribal government is providing primary case management.

                      •    The court with jurisdiction orders the child to return home.

                      •    The change in placement is less than 30 calendar days after
                           the child's initial removal from their home.

                      •    The court orders the placement change.

                      •    The child is an MCI ward, and the placement change is the
                           result of the MCI superintendent's denial of consent to adoption
                           by the caregiver.

                      •    The child is an Indian child as defined by MCL 712B.3(k) and
                           the placement change is within or to the placement
                           preferences in MCL 712B.23; see NAA 215,
                           Placement/Replacement Priorities for Indian Child(ren).

                      A caregiver has the right to appeal the placement change under the
                      following circumstances: see Caregiver Appeal to the Foster Care
                      Review Board in this item:




                      •    The supervising agency has reasonable cause to believe the
                           child has suffered sexual abuse or non-accidental physical
                           injury, or there is substantial risk of harm to the child's
                           physical or emotional well-being within the caregiver's home;
                           see Suspected Abuse/Neglect by the Caregiver in this item.

                      •    The supervising agency has determined the move is in the
                           child's best interest; see Best Interest in this item.

 Suspected
 Abuse/Neglect by
 the Caregiver

                      When a case manager suspects a child in foster care has suffered
                      sexual abuse or non-accidental physical injury, or there is a
                      substantial risk of harm to the child's physical or emotional well-
                      being in the caregiver's home, a children's protective services
                      (CPS) referral must be made immediately; see FOM 722-13,
                      Referrals to Children's Protective Services (CPS). The case
                      manager must also immediately file a licensing complaint if the
                      caregiver is a licensed foster parent. When a CPS referral is made
                      regarding a child in foster care, the child's case manager must
                      comply with the policy requirements outlined in FOM 722-13A,
                      Maltreatment in Care - Foster Care Responsibilities.

                      If the supervising agency believes the child is at substantial risk in
                      the home, the child must be moved immediately and the caregiver
                      may appeal the decision to the Foster Care Review Board (FCRB).
                      The appeal does not prevent the move; see Caregiver Appeal in
                      this item.

                      If the supervising agency does not believe the child is at substantial
                      risk of harm and remains placed in the home during the
                      investigation, the case manager must establish a safety plan to
                      address the identified concerns.

 Best Interest

                      Placement changes made in the best interest of the child may
                      include but are not limited to situations when:

                      •    The child's needs are no longer being met by the current
                           caregiver.

                      •    The child is placed with an unrelated foster family and there is
                           a suitable relative available for placement.




                      •    There is an available placement that will reunite a separated
                           sibling group.

                      If the case manager and supervisor determine it is in the child's
                      best interest to change placements:

                      •    A family team meeting (FTM) must be held at least three
                           business days prior to a best interest placement change to
                           allow interested parties the opportunity to participate in the
                           decision; see Family Team Meeting in this item and FOM 722-
                           06B, Family Team Meeting.

                      •    The supervisor must approve the move before the placement
                           change.

                      •    If the child is an MCI ward and the current caregiver expresses
                           either a verbal or written interest in adopting the child, the MCI
                           superintendent must be consulted prior to the placement
                           change.

                      The caregiver may appeal the decision to the FCRB; see Caregiver
                      Appeal to the Foster Care Review Board in this item.

FAMILY TEAM
MEETING

                      An FTM must be held at least three business days prior to a
                      planned placement change or no later than three business days
                      after an unplanned placement change; see FOM 722-06B, Family
                      Team Meeting.

NOTICE OF MOVE
 Parent

                      The case manager must notify the child's legal parents of all
                      placement changes.

                      •    Notification for planned placement changes must occur prior to
                           the placement change, and the parents must have the
                           opportunity to participate in selection of the next placement;
                           see FOM 722-03, Placement Selection and Standards.

                      •    For emergency placement changes, the case manager must
                           notify the child's legal parents immediately, no later than the
                           following business day.





                           Exception: For children who are absent without legal
                           permission (AWOLP), the case manager must inform the legal
                           parents of the absence within 24 hours; see FOM 722-03A,
                           Absent Without Legal Permission (AWOLP).

 Foster Parent

                      The caregiver must be notified of the intent to move the child 14
                      days prior to the intended date of the move unless the child’s health
                      or safety is jeopardized; see Suspected Abuse/Neglect by
                      Caregiver in this item. The DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice
                      of Move, must be used to notify the caregiver of the intent to move
                      the child.

                      The DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move, contains
                      information for the caregiver regarding whether the right to appeal
                      the placement change exists based on the placement change
                      reason and instructions for exercising their right to appeal; see
                      Caregiver Appeal to the Foster Care Review Board in this item.

                      The DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move, must be
                      uploaded to the electronic case management system in the
                      document hyperlink in the child's placement record.

 MCI
 Superintendent

                      If the child is an MCI ward and the current caregiver expresses
                      either a verbal or written interest in adopting the child, the MCI
                      superintendent must be consulted prior to the placement change.

 Court and Child’s
 Lawyer-Guardian
 Ad Litem

                      The supervising agency must notify the court with jurisdiction over
                      the child and the child's lawyer-guardian ad litem (L-GAL) of the
                      change in placement using the DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile
                      Justice Action Summary; see FOM 722-08E, Foster Care/Juvenile
                      Justice Action Summary, for standards of promptness for planned
                      and emergency placement changes.






 Foster Care
 Review Board

                      The case manager must notify the State Court Administrative Office
                      (SCAO) FCRB of the proposed placement change if the caregiver
                      has a right to appeal the placement change; see Placement
                      Change Reasons in this item. A copy of the DHS-30, Foster
                      Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move, must be sent to the FCRB.

                                   Foster Care Review Board Program
                                   Michigan Hall of Justice
                                   P.O. Box 30048
                                   Lansing, MI 48909
 Child's Tribe

                      The case manager must send a copy of the DHS-30, Foster
                      Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move, to the child's tribe no later than
                      the business day after giving the DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver
                      Notice of Move, to the foster parent or caregiver.

                      The case manager must provide the DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile
                      Justice Action Summary, to the child's tribe; see FOM 722-08E,
                      Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action Summary for standards of
                      promptness for planned and emergency placement changes.

CAREGIVER
APPEAL TO THE
FOSTER CARE
REVIEW BOARD

                      If the caregiver has the right to appeal the move to the FCRB, the
                      supervising agency may only move the child prior to completion of
                      the appeal process if the child is being moved due to alleged sexual
                      abuse, non-accidental physical injury, or a substantial risk of harm
                      to the child's emotional well-being or physical safety; see
                      Placement Change Reasons in this item. The appeal process is
                      complete when one of the following occurs:

                      •    The FCRB concurs with the decision to move the child.
                      •    The court orders the child to be moved.
                      •    In the case of an MCI ward, the MCI superintendent
                           determines where the child must be placed.






 Appeal Process

                      Upon receipt of the DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice of
                      Move, the caregiver has three business days to appeal the
                      placement decision.

                      Once the FCRB has received an appeal, it will notify the
                      supervising agency of the appeal. No later than the business day
                      following notification from FCRB of the caregiver's appeal, the
                      supervising agency must notify:

                      •    The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services
                           (MDHHS) local office if a placement agency foster care (PAFC)
                           provider is supervising the child.

                      •    The child's tribe if the child is an Indian child.

                      Prior to the FCRB investigation, the supervising agency must
                      review the decision to move the child and respond to the FCRB
                      with the justification for the placement change and any other
                      relevant information.

                      Note: If the supervising agency informs the FCRB that the child
                      will not be moved and the issues have been resolved, an
                      investigation will not take place.

                      The FCRB will investigate the reasons for the move within seven
                      days of receiving the appeal from the caregiver. If the child is an
                      Indian child as defined in MCL 712B.3(k), the child's tribe must be
                      invited to participate in the FCRB investigation, and FCRB must
                      follow the best interests procedures in MCL 712B.5.

                      Within three days after the investigation, the FCRB will supply its
                      findings and recommendations to the caregiver, the parents, the
                      supervising agency, and the MCI superintendent, if the child is an
                      MCI ward.

                      •    If the FCRB finds the proposed move is in the child's best
                           interest, the child will be moved.

                      •    If the FCRB's finding is contrary to the supervising agency's
                           recommendation, the child will remain in the placement, except
                           when the child was moved from the foster home due to
                           suspected sexual abuse, non-accidental physical injury, or
                           substantial risk of harm to the child's emotional well-being or
                           physical safety, until the court or MCI superintendent has




                           rendered an order or a decision regarding the child's
                           placement.

                      Temporary Wards

                      For temporary wards, if FCRB does not agree with the supervising
                      agency's recommendation to move the child, the FCRB will notify
                      the court with jurisdiction over the child of the disagreement.

                      The court must schedule a hearing not less than seven days and
                      no more than 14 days after receiving the notice of disagreement
                      from the FCRB. The court must notify the caregiver, all interested
                      parties, and the prosecutor's office of the hearing.

                      At the hearing, the court will take testimony from all interested
                      parties including the Indian child's tribe if applicable, and evidence
                      will be considered. The court will make a finding on the record
                      about the child's placement.

                      If the court finds it is in the best interest of the child to be moved, it
                      will enter an order authorizing placement of the child elsewhere. If
                      the court believes the child should remain in the same placement, it
                      will enter an order continuing the placement. The court may also
                      order the child returned to the caregiver, even if the child was
                      moved from the home due to suspected sexual abuse or non-
                      accidental physical injury.

                      Note: A court order that orders a child to be moved or remain in
                      the same placement or specifies placement eliminates title IV-E
                      eligibility for that child. Federal regulations allow for an exception if
                      certain criteria are met; see FOM 902, Funding Determinations and
                      Title IV-E Eligibility.

                      MCI Wards

                      In the case of an MCI ward, if FCRB does not agree with the
                      supervising agency's recommendation to move the child, the FCRB
                      will notify the MCI superintendent of the disagreement.

                      Within 14 days of receipt of the notification of disagreement, the
                      MCI superintendent must make a placement decision and notify the
                      caregivers and the supervising agency of the decision.






 When Placement
 Change Is Not
 Appealed

                       If the caregiver does not appeal the move within three business
                       days from the receipt of the notice, the child may be moved. To
                       comply with child placing agency (CPA) Rule 400.12405, the
                       agency must not move the child for 14 days after notice. This
                       allows the caregiver and the child time to transition to the next
                       placement. If prior notice is not given, the agency must notify the
                       caregiver, at the time of the change, why prior notice was not given.

DOCUMENTATION

                       The case manager must update the child's placement in the
                       electronic case record. The change of placement must be
                       documented on the DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action
                       Summary; see FOM 722-08E, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action
                       Summary, for standards or promptness for planned and emergency
                       placement changes. The DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice
                       Action Summary, must be uploaded to the electronic case
                       management system in the document hyperlink in the child's
                       placement record.

 Provided to
 Previous Caregiver

                       The case manager must provide the DHS-30, Foster
                       Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move, to the previous caregiver at least
                       14 calendar days prior to moving the child from a foster home,
                       relative caregiver, or court-ordered unrelated caregiver.

                       Exception: If the caregiver requests or agrees to the placement
                       change, the agency is not required to wait 14 days prior to moving
                       the child. Caregiver agreement to the placement change must be
                       documented on the DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice of
                       Move.

 Provided to New
 Caregiver

                       See FOM 722-03, Placement Selection and Standards, for
                       documents that must be provided to the new caregiver at or before
                       the time of placement.






CASE MANAGER
CONTACTS

                      For placement change contact standards; see FOM 722-06H, Case
                      Contacts.

TEMPORARY
BREAKS

                      The case manager must update the child's placement in the
                      placement section of the electronic case record when the child
                      enters any of the following temporary breaks:

                      •   AWOLP
                      •   Detention.
                      •   Jail.
                      •   Medical hospitalization.
                      •   Psychiatric hospitalization.

                      See FOM 903-07, Temporary Break/Bed Hold Payments.

                      If the child returns to the same placement where they resided prior
                      to the temporary break, new placement documentation is not
                      required to be provided to the caregiver.

                      Exception: The case manager must provide the caregiver with an
                      updated DHS-221, Medical Passport, if the child received health
                      services during the temporary break.

 Case Manager
 Contacts for
 Temporary Breaks

                      The case manager must make monthly face-to-face contact with
                      the child during the temporary break. Increased change of
                      placement contacts are not required when a child enters one of the
                      temporary breaks listed above.

                      Returning to the Prior Placement After the Break

                      If the child returns to the previous placement after a temporary
                      break, increased change of placement contacts are not required.

                      Exception: When a child returns from AWOLP, a face-to-face
                      contact must occur within the first five business days; see FOM
                      722-03A, Absent Without Legal Permission (AWOLP).




                      Entering a New Placement After the Break

                      If a child does not return to the placement where they resided prior
                      to the temporary break, the placement change timeframes and
                      documentation requirements in this item apply; see Documentation
                      in this item.

RESOURCES
                      •   DHS-30, Foster Parent/Caregiver Notice of Move.
                      •   DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action Summary.
LEGAL BASE
  State

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, as amended, MCL 712A.13b

                      Change in foster care placement.

                      Michigan Indian Family Preservation Act, 2012 PA 565, as
                      amended, MCL 712B.3

                      Definitions.

                      Michigan Indian Family Preservation Act, 2012 PA 565, as
                      amended, MCL 712B.5

                      Best interests of child; duties of courts.

                      Michigan Indian Family Preservation Act, 2012 PA 565, as
                      amended, MCL 712B.23

                      Placement; least restrictive setting; order of preference;
                      documentation.

 Licensing Rule

                      Mich Admin Code, R 400.12405

                      Change of placement.

POLICY CONTACT

                      Questions about this policy item may be directed to the Child
                      Welfare Policy Mailbox (Child-Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov).





