                                 APPROVED ABSENCES FROM FOSTER                   FOB 2023-015
   FOM 722-03F       1 of 5
                                        CARE PLACEMENT                               10-1-2023


OVERVIEW

                      Approved absences from foster care placement are necessary to
                      support the well-being of the child and caregiver. Approved
                      absences from foster care placement also assist with ensuring a
                      child's best interest and timely permanence. Case managers must
                      follow the timeframes and requirements regarding a child's absence
                      from placement in this policy. When it is necessary to have
                      absences there is no change in placement required in the electronic
                      case management system.

APPROVED
ABSENCES FROM
PLACEMENT

                      The following are reasons a child may be approved for an absence
                      from placement:

                      Substitute care is short term care and supervision for a foster child
                      in the absence of the caregiver. Substitute care is driven by the
                      caregiver's need for substitute care. The substitute caregiver does
                      not need to be licensed. If the substitute caregiver is licensed, a
                      capacity change does not need to occur.

                      Parenting time is visits between a child and the child's parents to
                      support reunification and preserve attachment. When reunification
                      is the goal, the parenting time plan should include progressively
                      increased parental contact.

                      Sibling visits are visits between a child and the child's siblings to
                      support reunification and preserve attachment. Siblings in foster
                      care who are not placed together must have regular visitation.

                      Pre-adoptive visits are approved visits between a child and a
                      prospective adoptive family to support the transition to the adoptive
                      home. The pre-adoptive family must have an approved adoptive
                      family assessment and does not have to be a licensed caregiver.

                      Prudent parent absences from the placement are child centered
                      activities that promote normalcy for children. These activities do not
                      have to be with a licensed caregiver. If the child is staying with a
                      licensed caregiver, a capacity change does not need to occur.

                      Respite care is short term care and supervision of a child who is
                      an abuse and/or neglect ward, including dual wards, and juvenile
                      justice wards in any of the following placements: licensed foster
                      home, relative caregiver home, adoptive home, legal parents or


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                  APPROVED ABSENCES FROM FOSTER                   FOB 2023-015
   FOM 722-03F       2 of 5
                                         CARE PLACEMENT                               10-1-2023


                      guardians, and court ordered placements. Children who are a part
                      of the Serious Emotional Disturbances Waiver (SEDW) and were
                      referred by Community Mental Health (CMH), whether they are
                      placed in foster care or not, qualify for respite. Respite is available
                      to provide temporary and occasional relief to the child and the
                      child's current placement caregiver, parent, or legal guardian to
                      maintain the ability to meet the needs of the child and to support
                      the well-being of the current placement caregiver. Caring for the
                      needs of children who have experienced the trauma of neglect
                      and/or abuse requires intensive time, effort, and skill. Respite
                      services can be provided by licensed or unlicensed providers; see
                      SRM 109, Respite Services and Engagement.

                      An approved absence from placement cannot override or interfere
                      with the child's case plan or court-ordered requirements.

                      Example: Court- ordered requirements such as parenting time and
                      sibling visits.

 Notification

                      Caregiver

                      The caregiver must notify the case manager prior to the absence
                      anytime a child will be away from their placement for three or more
                      days. The case manager is to inform the child's Lawyer Guardian
                      Ad Litem (LGAL) and parents (for temporary wards) of planned
                      absences.

                      For absences requiring substitute care for 24 hours or more,
                      caregivers in licensed foster homes must provide notice to the
                      agency before any planned overnight substitute care and/or within
                      24 hours of any unplanned absence requiring substitute care
                      (R400.12319).

                      Legal Parent

                      The case manager is to give notice to all legal parents for absences
                      exceeding three days. This may be a written notice or notice by
                      phone, which must then be entered into a social work contact in the
                      electronic case record.

                      Exception: Family visitation that is otherwise documented in the
                      current visitation plan.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                              STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                APPROVED ABSENCES FROM FOSTER                  FOB 2023-015
   FOM 722-03F       3 of 5
                                       CARE PLACEMENT                                 10-1-2023


 Approval Path for
 Absences from
 Placement

                      Absences for three to five days:

                      •   Do not require further approval beyond the case manager.

                      •   The placement must be considered intact by the caregiver and
                          return to the placement is planned.

                      •   The placement caregiver agrees to remain involved with the
                          child and/or the child's family during the absence.

                      •   Payments may continue as long as the placement is
                          maintained for the child and a return to the placement is
                          planned.

                      •   Do not change the child's placement in the electronic case
                          record.

                      Absences for six to 14 days:

                      •   Foster care supervisor approval is required and must be
                          documented in a social work contact in the electronic case
                          record.

                      •   The placement must be considered intact by the caregiver and
                          return to the placement is planned.

                      •   The placement caregiver agrees to remain involved with the
                          child and/or the child's family during the absence.

                      •   Payments may continue as long as the placement is
                          maintained for the child and a return to the placement is
                          planned.

                      •   Do not change the child's placement in the electronic case
                          record.

                      Absences for 15 consecutive days or more:

                      •   County director or designee must approve the absence for
                          both Michigan Department of Health and Human Services
                          (MDHHS) and private agency supervised cases.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                          STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                              DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                APPROVED ABSENCES FROM FOSTER                   FOB 2023-015
   FOM 722-03F       4 of 5
                                       CARE PLACEMENT                               10-1-2023


                      •   The case manager must write a memo to the county director or
                          designee and include the following information:

                                   The reason for the absence from placement.

                                   The location where the child will be staying.

                                   The person who will be responsible for the child while
                                   the child is away from the placement.

                                   The case manager has confirmed with the caregiver
                                   they are willing to accept the child back following the
                                   absence.

                                   The caregiver's willingness to continue involvement
                                   with the child during the absence.

                                   The planned begin and end date of the absence.

                                   The child's fund source.

                      Note: If the child's fund source is not title IV-E, the county
                      director/designee may approve payment of the age-appropriate rate
                      and the Placement Agency Foster Care (PAFC) general foster care
                      administrative rate, if appropriate.

TEMPORARY
BREAKS

                      The following are considered temporary breaks from placement and
                      a new placement must be entered into the electronic case record:

                      •   Absent without Legal Permission (AWOLP).
                      •   Detention.
                      •   Jail.
                      •   Medical Hospitalization.
                      •   Psychiatric Hospitalization.

                      See FOM 903-07, Temporary Breaks/Bed Hold Payments for more
                      information.

 Documentation

                      The case manager must document the approved absence in a
                      social work contact in the electronic case management system. The
                      documentation must include the following:



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                              DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                 APPROVED ABSENCES FROM FOSTER                 FOB 2023-015
   FOM 722-03F       5 of 5
                                        CARE PLACEMENT                             10-1-2023


                      •   Begin and end dates of the absence.

                      •   The individual who approved the absence and the date the
                          absence was approved; see Approval Path in this item.

                      •   The name, address, and contact information of the individual(s)
                          with whom the child will be staying with during the absence.

                      Note: The name, address, and contact information of the
                      individual(s) with whom the child will be staying with may be
                      documented in the Additional Narrative section of the social work
                      contact if there are safety or privacy concerns related to the
                      information being contained in the case service plan.

LEGAL AUTHORITY



 State Laws

                      Child Care Organizations Act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, MCL
                      722.111 et seq.

                      Foster family home and foster family group home; is care and
                      supervision that is provided 24 hours a day, for four or more days a
                      week, for two or more consecutive weeks.

 Licensing Rule

                      Mich Admin Code, R400.12319

                      An agency's substitute care policy must support substitute
                      caregivers and childcare licensing rules.

POLICY CONTACT

                      Questions about this policy item may be directed to the Child
                      Welfare Policy Mailbox (Child-Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov).




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
