                                                                                FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       1 of 7     FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                     2-1-2014


ADMINISTRATIVE
RULES FOR CHILD
PLACING AGENCIES

 Policies and
 Procedures

                       1973 PA 116, Child Care Organization Licensing Act, as amended,
                       provides for the protection of children through the licensing and reg-
                       ulation of child care organizations and for the establishment of stan-
                       dards for child care in the form of administrative rules; see FOM
                       721 for legal citations.

                       The following policies reflect and implement selected administrative
                       rules for child placing agencies. These are not administrative rules
                       but DHS policies designed to ensure compliance with rules.

 Religion

                       Services from child placing agencies are available to all children,
                       regardless of the religious orientation of the child or parent. The
                       agency must not require a child to attend church services or to fol-
                       low specific religious training. The agency will attempt to fulfill
                       parental wishes whenever possible, while taking into consideration
                       the child's feelings and desires. If there is disagreement between
                       the parents and child, parental wishes prevail.

                       Foster parents/caregivers are expected to take into consideration
                       the child's religious preference, especially when the child has
                       established a pattern of religious belief and practice. Foster
                       parents/caregivers assume the responsibility for providing
                       opportunities for religious education and attendance at religious
                       services in accordance with the religious preference of the child
                       and/or parent(s).

                       Children may not be refused the right to attend the church denomi-
                       nation of their choice, unless there are specific safety concerns. A
                       decision that the child may not attend a specific religious denomina-
                       tion service must be approved by the county director or designee.
                       Children may not be required to attend the church preferred by the
                       foster parent/caregiver.

                       Child placing agencies may not impose their religious beliefs on
                       children in their care. Child placing agencies must also ensure the
                       foster parents/caregivers do not impose their beliefs or practices on
                       the children in their home. (Rule 400.12407)


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                  FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       2 of 7     FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                       2-1-2014


 Mail

                       All children in the care of a child placing agency are permitted to
                       send and receive mail. The child's letters shall not be read by oth-
                       ers, except where there is clear and convincing evidence to justify
                       such action. If there is justification for opening a letter, the child
                       shall be present when the letter is opened. The caseworker must
                       be available to the child when mail with potentially distressing
                       content is presented. (Rule 400.12408)

                       Exception: Packages are exempt from the prohibition against
                       inspection.

 Personal
 Possessions/
 Allowances

                       A child has the right to have his/her personal possessions during
                       placement in foster care and when leaving foster care. The
                       payment for family foster care includes an allowance portion for the
                       child placed there. See FOM 903-03, Payment For Foster Family
                       Care, for detailed information on the intended handling of and use
                       of the allowance. (Rule 400.12410)

 Placement of
 Siblings

                       Siblings are entitled to be placed together when in foster care out-
                       side their own family. If this proves impossible, the reasons are to
                       be recorded in the DHS-65, Initial Service Plan (ISP), and/or subse-
                       quent DHS-66, Updated Service Plan(s) (USP), as appropriate.
                       Written second line supervisory approval is required for a
                       placement which separates or maintains separation of siblings; see
                       FOM 722-03, Placement of Sibling Groups. (Rule 400.12404)

                       When lack of available bedroom space is the reason that the sib-
                       lings are separated in foster care, see FOM 922-1, Foster Family
                       Home Development, to determine the availability of a licensing vari-
                       ance.

                       When separated, the relationship between siblings must be main-
                       tained by a detailed plan of visits, phone calls, and letters. Visits
                       must occur monthly. If a child has been placed for adoption and
                       his/her siblings remain in care, the adoptive parents should be
                       encouraged to continue contact with the child’s siblings. The
                       visitation plan is to be recorded in the applicable service plan and



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                 FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       3 of 7       FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                      2-1-2014


                       the DHS-67, Parent-Agency Treatment Plan and Service
                       Agreement.

 Placement
 Preparation

                       Placement preparation must be consistent with all of the following:

                             The child’s age.
                             The child’s individual needs.
                             The circumstances necessitating placement.
                             Any special problems presented.

                       The responsibility for documenting the necessity for a child's initial
                       placement or replacement in foster care will rest with either the
                       CPS worker or foster care worker, depending on who makes the
                       placement. CPS will be providing documentation in the Transfer to
                       Foster Care Information Summary, for the first placement; see FOM
                       722-01. Documentation of the preparation for a child's return home
                       will typically be provided by the foster care worker. In some
                       instances, CPS may also have this responsibility. Documentation of
                       this information is to be included in required narrative reports, as
                       appropriate. The SWSS FAJ-generated DHS-90, Placement
                       Outline is used to document placement preparation. A notation of
                       too young is not sufficient. Placement preparation is also preparing
                       the foster parent/caregiver to meet the child’s needs; therefore
                       when a child is too young to explain the move, placement
                       preparation activities can include but are not limited to informing the
                       foster parent/caregiver of the child’s:

                             Sleeping schedule.
                             Formula and feeding schedule.
                             Medical needs.

                       See FOM 722-01, Children's Protective Services - Foster Care
                       Transfer Summary Information, and FOM 722-03,
                       Placement/Replacement. (Rule 400.12404)

 Behavior
 Management

                       Child placing agencies must have a behavior management policy
                       that identifies appropriate and specific methods of behavior man-
                       agement. The methods of behavior management must be positive
                       and consistent, based on each foster child’s needs, stage of devel-



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                      FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       4 of 7       FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                          2-1-2014


                       opment and behavior. They must promote self-control, self-esteem
                       and independence. (Rule 400.12406)

                       The following types of punishment are prohibited:

                             Physical force, excessive restraint, or any kind of punishment
                              inflicted on the body, including spanking.

                             Confinement in an area such as a closet or locked room.

                             Withholding necessary food, clothing, rest, toilet use or
                              entrance to the foster home.

                             Mental or emotional cruelty.

                             Verbal abuse, threats or derogatory remarks about the child or
                              his/her family. Examples include but are not limited to the
                              following:

                                  Academic progress.
                                  Behavior(s).
                                  Appearance.

                             Denial of necessary educational, medical, counseling or social
                              work services.

                             Withholding of parental or sibling visitations.

                       A foster parent/caregiver may use reasonable restraint to prevent a
                       foster child from harming himself or herself, other persons or prop-
                       erty or to allow the child to gain control of himself or herself.

                       Child placing agencies are to work with foster parents/caregivers
                       and provide training to them which will encourage consistent and
                       non-physical discipline practices for both foster and birth children.
                       However, any local discipline policy developed to satisfy child-plac-
                       ing agency administrative rules is to address discipline practices for
                       foster children only. Local policy is not to be implemented which
                       prohibits the foster parent/caregiver’s use of reasonable physical
                       discipline for either birth or adopted children.

                       Discipline and child-handling techniques are to be recorded in the
                       Parent-Agency Treatment Plan and Service Agreement, under Fos-
                       ter Parent/Relative/Unrelated Caregiver Activities; see FOM 722-
                       08C. The techniques must be child-specific and are to be
                       consistent with the child placing agency’s behavior management
                       policy.


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                                   STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                  FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       5 of 7       FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                       2-1-2014


 Education

                       No later than five school days after placement of a child in foster
                       care, the child placing agency or the foster parent/caregiver with
                       agency approval, must enroll each child of school age into a school
                       program. (Rule 400.12409)

                       The child placing agency must notify the school administration, in
                       writing, the name of the person who is supervising the child’s foster
                       care case and who is responsible for the care of the child, using the
                       DHS-714, School Enrollment Notification letter.

                       The DHS-713, Request for Report Card letter, is used to request a
                       copy of the child’s report card from the school. Both of these letters
                       are generated from the SWSS FAJ Education module. The DHS-
                       3185, Placement/Education Record, is also generated from SWSS
                       FAJ. See FOM 722-11, Surrogate Parent for Educational Services,
                       for information on special education services.

                       School programs, whether public or private, must be accredited. If a
                       child is allowed to attend a private school, the school’s philosophy
                       must not be contrary to the child’s or the family’s beliefs, customs,
                       culture, values and practices. Parental permission is required for a
                       temporary court ward to attend private school.

 Medical/Dental
 Care

                       The child placing agency must ensure that each child:

                             Has a physical examination within 30 calendar days after initial
                              foster care placement.

                             Receives a physical examination every 14 months.

                             Has current immunizations.

                             Has a dental examination within 90 calendar days after
                              placement unless the child has had an exam within six months
                              prior to placement or is less than four years of age and
                              annually thereafter, unless greater frequency is indicated.
                              (Rule 400.12413)

                       Immunizations are considered routine medical care. If the child's
                       parent prohibits immunizations based on religious grounds, obtain a
                       signed statement from the parent that specifies the prohibitions. A



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                    FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       6 of 7       FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                          2-1-2014


                       foster parent/caregiver may not prohibit immunizations of foster
                       children based on religious grounds.

                       Documentation that all requirements have been met must be con-
                       tained in the medical records section of the child's foster care case
                       record on the DHS-1662, Youth Health Record, and the DHS-1664,
                       Youth Health Record, Yearly Dental; see FOM 722-06, Medical
                       Passports.

                       The DHS-221, Medical Passport, must be provided to the foster
                       parents/caregivers, and to the legal parents if the child is a
                       temporary court ward; see FOM 722-04, Information to be Provided
                       to Foster Parent(s)/Relative/Unrelated Caregivers Prior to
                       Placement.

 Unusual Incident
 Reporting

                       Immediately the foster parent/caregiver must notify the child placing
                       agency of the following incidents:

                             A foster child is missing from a foster home; the foster
                              parent/caregiver must notify the child placing agency
                              immediately after the child is missing; see FOM 722-03,
                              AWOL.

                             Any serious illness or injury requiring hospitalization of a child
                              in foster care. The child placing agency must also report the
                              incident to the legal parent, or to the MCI superintendent for
                              MCI wards.

                             A foster child’s involvement with law enforcement authorities.

                             Any attempted removal or removal of a foster child from the
                              foster home by any person who is not authorized by the child
                              placing agency. (Rule 400.12415)

 Child/Ward Death

                       The death of a temporary/permanent ward must be reported imme-
                       diately to all of the following (Rule 400.12415):

                             The DHS monitoring worker, if applicable.
                             The legal parent, guardian, or next of kin.
                             The MCI superintendent for MCI wards.
                             The Bureau of Children and Adult Licensing.
                             The Child Welfare Contract Compliance Unit, if applicable.


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                                STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                                                                FOB 2014-002
    FOM 722-02       7 of 7       FOSTER CARE - ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
                                                                                     2-1-2014


                       Within one business day, the primary foster care worker must send
                       a copy of the DHS-649, Child Fatality Notification, to the court that
                       had jurisdiction over the child.

                       Note: Notification to parents whose rights were terminated is not
                       required. The ward’s family should be notified and offered the
                       opportunity to participate in the funeral arrangements, if
                       appropriate.

                       See SRM 172, Child/Ward Death Alert Procedures and Time
                       Frames, for complete instructions.

                       Refer to FOM 903-10, Funeral Payments, for information regarding
                       funeral arrangements and burial payments for an MCI ward.

 Other

                       A child placing agency must also have written policies that address
                       the following:

                             Clothing policy. (Rule 400.12411)
                             Foster home emergency provisions policy. (Rule 400.12412)
                             Substitute care policy. (Rule 400.12414)
                             Hazardous materials policy. (Rule 400.12416)
 Additional Rules

                       All child placing agency (CPA) rules can be found at:

                       http://www.state.mi.us/orr/emi/admincode.asp?Admin-
                       Code=Single&Admin_Num=40012101&Dpt=HS&RngHigh=

                       CPA rule interpretations are also available at:

                       http://www.michigan.gov/documents/dhs/CPA_Rule_Interpreta
                       tions._175210_7.pdf




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
