
OVERVIEW

                      Unless harmful, children in foster care should have daily or
                      near daily contact with their families. Maintaining family contact
                      and parenting time is essential to child and family attachment and
                      well-being.

                      Family time is interactive in-person contact among children and
                      their parents, siblings, and other family members. It is separate
                      from counseling, therapy, assessments, case reviews, family team
                      meetings or court hearings. Family time can be supplemented with
                      other types of contact such as phone calls, video calls, letters,
                      email, pictures, and gifts. Frequent supplemental contacts must be
                      encouraged and allowed unless they are harmful.

PARENTING TIME

                      Families with children under the Michigan Department of Health
                      and Human Services (MDHHS) care and supervision who have a
                      permanency goal of reunification must be provided parenting time
                      unless an approved exception exists; see Parenting Time
                      Exceptions in this item. Parenting time among parent(s) and their
                      child(ren) is facilitated by the supervising agency.

                      One of the best predictors of timely and successful
                      reunification is the frequency and quality of visits between a
                      child and their parents. It is essential for children and parents to
                      have contact as soon as possible after removal; see Parenting
                      Time Plan in this item. When reunification is the goal, the plan
                      should include progressively increased parental responsibility for
                      the daily care of the child.

                      Parenting time must never be used as a reward or withheld as
                      punishment for either the child(ren) or parent(s); see
                      Suspension of Parenting Time in this item.

 Expansion of In-
 Person Parenting
 Time

                      For children with the goal of reunification, there must be a written
                      plan for increased in-person parenting time, which must be
                      reassessed monthly during supervision and documented quarterly
                      in the parenting time plan within the case service plan. Ongoing
                      assessment of the parent's ability to safely care for and interact with
                      the child must be used to guide expansion of parenting time.





                      Parameters for parenting time should be expanded as soon as
                      safely possible to support and sustain the parent-child bond and
                      attachment. Expansion of parenting time includes:

                      •    Increasing the frequency and/or duration of in-person parenting
                           time.

                      •    Changing the location to support a more family friendly
                           environment to encourage typical parent/child interaction.

                      •    Moving to unsupervised parenting time as soon as possible.

                      Supplementing In-Person Parenting Time

                      Parents should continually be involved in activities and planning for
                      their child, unless documented as harmful to the child. These
                      activities may be used to supplement in-person parenting time
                      above the minimum number of required visits. Examples of
                      acceptable activities include but are not limited to:

                      •    Involvement in medical and dental appointments.
                      •    Attendance at school conferences, sporting events, plays,
                           recitals, etc.
 Virtual Parenting
 Time

                      In addition to in-person parenting time, children in foster care with a
                      goal of reunification should have frequent virtual contact, such as
                      video or phone calls, with their parents. Caseworkers must
                      document plans for virtual family time in the parenting time plan.

 Parenting Time
 Plan

                      Caseworkers must engage the family in creation of the parenting
                      time plan, including:

                      •    The frequency, duration, and location of in-person and virtual
                           parenting time.

                      •    Specific behaviors expected of the parent(s) during parenting
                           time.

                      •    Supports needed from others, such as the caseworker and
                           child's foster parent(s)/relative caregiver(s) for successful
                           implementation of the parenting time plan.





                      In the case service plan, the caseworker must document:

                      •    The frequency, location, and duration of in-person parenting
                           time.

                      •    The frequency, duration, and methods for virtual parenting
                           time.

                      •    The action steps required for expansion of in-person parenting
                           time.

                      Caseworkers must schedule parenting time with primary
                      consideration for the child's needs and the parent's time
                      commitments, including employment and mandated service
                      requirements. The supervising agency must institute a flexible
                      schedule to provide hours outside of the traditional workday to
                      accommodate the schedules of the individuals involved.

                      Frequency of In-Person Parenting Time

                      The initial in-person parenting time must occur as soon as possible
                      but no later than seven calendar days following placement.

                      Frequency of in-person parenting time is determined by the age of
                      the child when they are initially placed out of home.

                      For sibling groups placed out of home on the same date, the
                      number of required visits is determined by the youngest child's age.
                      When a child is born or enters an out-of-home placement on a later
                      date, the frequency of visits for that child will be based on the
                      child’s individual age and does not affect the already established
                      visitation schedule of the other sibling(s).

                      The minimum frequency guidelines for in-person parenting time
                      detailed below are to be followed immediately upon out-of-home
                      placement, unless otherwise ordered by the court:

                      •    Newborn to age five: twice per week.
                      •    Six years and older: once per week.

                      Note: The caseworker must not reduce the frequency of an
                      existing parenting time plan due to a child reaching age 6.

                      If parenting time is not occurring as outlined above, the barriers that
                      are contributing to less frequent parenting time and how those
                      barriers are being addressed must be documented in the case
                      service plan.




                      Frequency of Virtual Parenting Time

                      Virtual parenting time must occur as soon as possible after
                      placement and as frequently as possible while the child is placed
                      out-of-home with a goal of reunification.

                      Duration

                      Parenting time should be long enough to promote parent-child
                      attachment. At a minimum, in-person parenting time should last for
                      at least one hour. The duration of virtual parenting time may vary in
                      accordance with the child's needs and development.

                      Note: Parenting time that last overnight or for multiple days, such
                      as over a weekend, are not considered a temporary break
                      placement; see FOM 722-03D, Placement Change.

                      Location

                      Parenting time should occur in a child and family friendly setting
                      conducive to normal interactions between the child and parent(s).
                      When safety permits, in-person parenting time should occur in
                      settings outside of the agency, such as:

                      •    The parent's home.
                      •    Relative/caregiver homes.
                      •    Parks.
                      •    Malls and shopping centers.
                      •    Restaurants or fast food establishments.
                      •    Early-On appointments, play groups, etc.

                      If in-person parenting times are not occurring in the parent's home,
                      the caseworker must document in the plan where the parenting
                      time is occurring and what conditions must exist for in-person
                      parenting time to occur in the parental home.

                      Note: Foster parents and relative caregivers can be reimbursed for
                      transportation expenses when it involves parent and sibling visits;
                      see FOM 903-09, Case Service Payments.

 Observation and
 Supervision

                      Parenting time must be supervised or unsupervised as ordered by
                      the court. Caseworkers may periodically observe unsupervised
                      parenting time to assess family functioning and relationships,
                      parenting skills, and adherence the parenting time plan.




                      If the court grants MDHHS discretion to provide supervised or
                      unsupervised parenting time, parenting time must be provided with
                      the lowest level of supervision needed to reasonably ensure child
                      safety.

                      Parenting time must be supervised if any of the following harm
                      factors were identified on the most recent safety assessment:

                      •    Caregiver(s) caused serious harm to the child and/or made a
                           plausible threat to cause serious physical harm in the current
                           investigation or report period.

                      •    The family has refused access to the child or the parent has
                           threatened to flee with the child.

                      •    Caregiver's behavior toward child is violent or out-of-control.

                      Note: Safety assessments must be completed with all updated
                      case service plans when the parents have made at least partial
                      progress in overall barrier reduction and parenting time; see FOM
                      722-09C, Safety Assessment. If the foster care caseworker has not
                      been required by policy to complete a safety assessment, the
                      above determination must be made using the most recent CPS
                      safety assessment completed prior to the child's removal.

                      If none of the above harm factors have been identified on the most
                      recent safety assessment and the caseworker and supervisor
                      believe that serious harm to the child is likely to occur if parenting
                      time is unsupervised, the caseworker must document, in
                      behaviorally specific terms, the risk and safety concerns that must
                      be rectified in order to safely reduce the level of supervision during
                      parenting time until unsupervised parenting time is determined
                      safe; see FOM 722-08F, Visitation Plans.

                      Supervised Parenting Time

                      When unsupervised parenting time cannot occur for one of the
                      reasons above, supervised parenting time ensures the child’s
                      safety and allows the caseworker to assess the parent/child
                      interactions and provide support and guidance.

                      In addition to the assigned caseworker, case aides, foster
                      parents/caregivers, relatives, and others may supervise parenting
                      time. The caseworker must communicate the expectations of the
                      parent during parenting time to the supervising individuals. The
                      caseworker must obtain updates on the quality of the parent/child





                      interactions during the visits from the individuals who supervise the
                      parenting times.

                      Caseworkers must reevaluate the need for supervision of parenting
                      time during monthly supervision with their supervisor; see
                      Supervisor Review in this item.

                      Required Supervision by the Caseworker

                      If parenting time is supervised by individuals other than the
                      assigned caseworker, the assigned caseworker must observe
                      parenting time at least once during the first 30 days after removal
                      and at least once per quarter thereafter to assess parenting skills
                      and attachment.

                      Review and Reassessment of Parenting Time Plan

                      The caseworker and supervisor must review the parenting time
                      plans for both in-person and virtual contact during monthly
                      supervision to discuss expansion opportunities and barriers to
                      expansion of and compliance with the parenting time plan.

                      The caseworker must reassess the parenting time plan, and the
                      parent's compliance with the plan, quarterly in the case service
                      plan; see FOM 722-09, Foster Care - Updated Service Plan, and
                      FOM 722-09A, Foster Care - Reunification Assessment.

                      If the parenting time plan was not expanded during the report
                      period, or if barriers exist that prevent the parent from complying
                      with the parenting time plan the caseworker must document the
                      reason(s) and/or barriers in the case service plan, as well as the
                      agency's efforts to rectify those barriers.

                      The supervisor must assist the caseworker in evaluating the
                      parent's progress in order to determine if the parenting time plan
                      should be expanded. The supervisor's approval of the case service
                      plan indicates approval of the parenting time plan; see FOM 722-
                      6H, Case Contacts.

 In-Person
 Parenting Time
 Exceptions

                      Families with children in foster care who have a goal of reunification
                      must have in-person parenting time unless an approved exception
                      exists. Exceptions to this requirement include:





                      •    The court orders less frequent parenting time.

                      •    One or both parents cannot attend due to compelling
                           circumstances such as hospitalization or incarceration.

                      •    The child is above the age of 16 and refuses to participate.

                      •    The parents are not attending despite the caseworker taking
                           adequate steps to ensure the parents’ ability to participate.

                           Note: This exception must only be used when a parent is
                           chronically and habitually missing parenting time. When this
                           exception is used, the caseworker must document (in the case
                           service plan) efforts to assist the parent in resolving the
                           barriers to attending parenting time.

                      Caseworkers must record all exceptions in MiSACWIS.
                      Caseworkers must document all reasonable efforts to ensure in-
                      person parenting time in the case service plan. When an exception
                      is recorded, the caseworker must review the child’s permanency
                      goal; see FOM 722-09A, Foster Care - Reunification Assessment.

                      Exceptions must be reevaluated quarterly or anytime
                      circumstances necessitate a change to the parenting time plan.

 Caseworker
 Discussion with
 Parents

                      Prior to completion of the initial DHS-441, Case Service Plan, the
                      assigned caseworker must discuss with the parents:

                      •    The critical importance of parenting time with the child.

                      •    The likely positive and negative effects of parenting time on the
                           child.

                      •    That parenting time is a good indicator of an early reunification
                           of the family unit.

                      •    That separation of a child from a parent can be traumatic. A
                           child may regress behaviorally or act out in anger against the
                           parent and others. Parent(s) may view this as a betrayal by the
                           child and may also express anger towards the system.
                           Caseworkers should assist the parent and child in
                           understanding their grief as a common reaction to the stress of
                           separation.




                      •    The specific behaviors and expectations during parenting time.

                      •    Circumstances necessary to expand parenting time.

                      •    The logistics of parenting time; for example, location, duration,
                           frequency, and supervision requirements.

                      •    Additionally, caseworkers and parents must work together to
                           identify the needs of the child that should be met during
                           parenting time and discuss the changes in parenting necessary
                           for reunification. These changes must be:

                                Behaviorally specific and measurable.
                                Developmentally appropriate.
                                Documented in the visitation plan in MiSACWIS.
 Caseworker
 Discussion with
 Foster
 Parent/Caregiver

                      Children may display challenging behaviors before and after
                      parenting time. These behaviors are often due to the child's
                      difficulty processing and expressing their emotions surrounding the
                      loss experienced during out-of-home placement. Caseworkers
                      should assist the foster parent(s)/relative caregiver(s) in under-
                      standing the child’s reaction to parenting time so that the foster
                      parent(s)/caregiver(s) can support the child.

                      Caseworkers should also assist foster parent(s)/relative caregivers
                      in understanding the expectations for frequent virtual contact
                      between children and their parents, as well as the temporary
                      caregiver's role in facilitating virtual contacts with young children.

SUSPENSION OF
PARENTING TIME

                      The caseworker may not cancel, postpone, or deny in-person or
                      virtual parenting time as a disciplinary measure for children or
                      punishment of parents. Parents must not be prevented from
                      interaction with their children because they are unable to pay for
                      necessary transportation or if they have not complied with the
                      treatment plan; for example, when a parent has a missed or
                      positive drug screen.

                      The court may order less frequent or no parenting time, if parenting
                      time, even when supervised, may be harmful to the child. The court
                      may order the child to have a psychological evaluation, counseling,



                      or both, to determine the appropriateness and the conditions of
                      parenting time. Parenting time must continue to the extent allowed
                      by the court during this time.

                      If the court orders a psychological evaluation, trauma assessment,
                      or counseling for the child to assess parenting time, the costs for
                      such assessments are the responsibility of the supervising agency;
                      see FOM 903-09, Case Service Payments.

 Termination of
 Parental Rights

                      Parenting time is not automatically suspended at the time a petition
                      to terminate parental rights is filed. The court must determine
                      parenting time rights when the termination petition is filed.

 Parenting Time
 Recommendations

                      At the court hearing involving the termination of parental rights peti-
                      tion, the caseworker must be prepared to offer testimony on what is
                      best for the child regarding the issue of parenting time. Also, if a
                      court hearing regarding the termination petition is a hearing at
                      which a case service plan is required, the caseworker’s parenting
                      time recommendation must be in the recommendations to the court
                      section of the case service plan. Caseworkers should consult with
                      the parent(s), and child(ren) if age- and developmentally-
                      appropriate, regarding their wishes for continued parenting time,
                      and include that information in their recommendation.

INCARCERATED
PARENTS

                      Unless there is documented evidence that parenting time or contact
                      would be harmful to the child or there is a no-contact order in place,
                      the caseworker must arrange for regular parenting time or contact
                      between a parent who is incarcerated and the child. Alternatives to
                      in-person parenting time at a jail or prison facility include, but are
                      not limited to:

                      •    Letters/pictures sent through the caseworker.
                      •    Phone contact.
                      •    Video visitation via a JPay account; see the JPay Video
                           Visitation website for more information.






LAW
ENFORCEMENT
INFORMATION
NETWORK (LEIN)
CHECKS

                      Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN) checks must be con-
                      ducted on all household members when a child will be having
                      parenting time at the parent’s home; see SRM 700, Law
                      Enforcement Information Network.

DOCUMENTATION

                      The frequency, location, duration, specific behavioral expectations,
                      and other requirements for in-person and virtual parenting time
                      described above must be documented in the parenting time plan.

                      Parenting time and sibling contact must be documented in social
                      work contacts; see FOM 722-06H, Case Contacts.

                      Note: If in-person parenting time occurs less frequently than
                      required in the Frequency of In-Person Parenting Time section of
                      this item, the reasons must be documented in the parenting time
                      plan.

SIBLING CONTACT
AND ONGOING
INTERACTION

                      Siblings in foster care who are not placed together must have
                      regular contact. At minimum, siblings placed apart must have one
                      in-person contact within the first 30 days of the placement that
                      results in separation and one in-person contact per calendar month
                      thereafter. Virtual contact, such as video calls and phone calls,
                      should occur as frequently as possible and desired by the siblings.

                      Note: Requirements for sibling contact continue after termination
                      of parental rights until case closure.

                      Caseworkers must:

                      •   Coordinate with the caregiver(s) to develop a plan for in-person
                          and virtual sibling contact.

                      •   Detail the plan for sibling visits and other contacts within the
                          sibling visitation section of the case service plan. The sibling
                          visitation plan must include specific:




                                     Dates of visits or contacts.
                                     Location of visits or contacts.
                                     Duration of visits or contacts.
 Sibling Visitation
 Exceptions

                       Caseworkers must engage caregivers, and children when age- and
                       developmentally appropriate, in development of the in-person and
                       virtual sibling contact plans.

                       Monthly in-person sibling contact is required unless:

                       •    The visit may be harmful to one or more of the siblings.

                            Note: Document the reason contact between siblings is
                            contrary to their safety or well-being in the sibling visitation
                            section of the case service plan.

                       •    The sibling is placed out-of-state in compliance with the
                            Interstate Compact on Placement of Children (ICPC).

                       •    The distance between the sibling's placements is more than 50
                            miles and one child is placed with a relative.

                            Note: When distance or interstate placement prevent in-
                            person sibling contact, the caseworker must ensure monthly
                            virtual sibling contacts if no other exception grounds exist.

                       •    One of the siblings is above the age of 16 and refuses.

                            Note: The caseworker must document the reasons for refusal
                            in the case service plan.

                       All exceptions must be recorded in MiSACWIS. The caseworker
                       must document reasonable efforts to ensure in-person sibling
                       contacts in the case service plan.

GRANDPARENTING
TIME

                       MCL 710.60 and MCL 722.27b, allow for grandparenting time
                       orders to be entered under two circumstances:

                       •    A circuit court may enter such an order as a result of a custody
                            dispute unrelated to the reason the child came into foster care.

                       •    A family division of the circuit court may enter a grandparenting
                            time order in stepparent adoptions.



                      In addition to honoring court-ordered grandparenting time of
                      children in foster care, caseworkers must also carefully consider all
                      requests from grandparents for in-person and virtual contact and
                      honor such if they are in the best interests of the child.

                      If the caseworker believes that court-ordered grandparenting time is
                      not in the best interests of the child, the local office should attempt
                      to negotiate the matter with the court. When resolution is not
                      possible at the local level, the local office may request assistance
                      from MDHHS Children's Services Legal Division (CSLD); see FOM
                      722-10, Court Review.

LEGAL AUTHORITY

 Federal Law

                      Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions
                      Act of 2008, 42 USC 620 et seq.

                      Requires that whenever siblings are not placed together,
                      reasonable efforts must be made to provide frequent visitation or
                      other ongoing interaction between the siblings.

 State Law

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.13a(13)

                      If a juvenile is removed from the parent's custody at any time, the
                      court shall permit the juvenile's parent to have regular and frequent
                      parenting time with the juvenile. Parenting time between the
                      juvenile and parent shall not be less than 1 time every 7 days
                      unless the court determines either that exigent circumstances
                      require less frequent parenting time or that parenting time, even if
                      supervised, may be harmful to the juvenile's life, physical health, or
                      mental well-being. If the court determines that parenting time, even
                      if supervised, may be harmful to the juvenile's life, physical health,
                      or mental well-being, the court may suspend parenting time until
                      the risk of harm no longer exists. The court may order the juvenile
                      to have a psychological evaluation or counseling, or both, to
                      determine the appropriateness and the conditions of parenting time.

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.18f(e)

                      Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, unless parenting
                      time, even if supervised, would be harmful to the child as
                      determined by the court under section 13a of this chapter or
                      otherwise, a schedule for regular and frequent parenting time




                      between the child and parent, which shall not be less than once
                      every 7 days.

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.19b(4)

                      If a petition to terminate the parental rights to a child is filed, the
                      court may enter an order terminating parental rights under subsec-
                      tion (3) at the initial dispositional hearing. If a petition to terminate
                      parental rights to a child is filed, the court may suspend parenting
                      time for a parent who is a subject of the petition.

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.19b(5)

                      If the court finds that there are grounds for termination of parental
                      rights and that termination of parental rights is in the child's best
                      interests, the court shall order termination of parental rights and
                      order that additional efforts for reunification of the child with the par-
                      ent not be made.

                      Foster Care and Adoption Services Act, 1994 PA 203, MCL
                      722.952(l)

                      "Sibling" means a child who is related through birth or adoption by
                      at least 1 common parent. Sibling includes that term as defined by
                      the American Indian or Alaskan native child's tribal code or custom.

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 710.60 and Child Custody
                      Act, 1970 PA 91, MCL 722.27b

                      Provisions for court ordered grandparenting time.

                      Modified Implementation, Sustainability, and Exit Plan,
                      Dwayne B. vs. Whitmer, No. 2:06-cv-13548, 6.23 Visits, Parent-
                      Child (Commitment 77)

                      DHHS shall ensure that children in foster care with a goal of
                      reunification shall have at least twice-monthly visitation with their
                      parents unless an exception exists.

                      Modified Implementation, Sustainability, and Exit Plan,
                      Dwayne B. vs. Whitmer, No. 2:06-cv-13548, 6.24 Visits,
                      Between Siblings (Commitment 78)

                      DHHS shall ensure that children in foster care who have siblings in
                      custody with whom they are not placed shall have at least monthly
                      visits with their siblings who are placed elsewhere in DHHS foster
                      care custody unless an exception exists.




 Licensing

                      Mich Admin Code R 400.12421(c)

                      An agency shall have a policy regarding visitation and parenting
                      time that contains provisions for visits between parents and children
                      except where parental rights have been terminated or when there is
                      a court determination that visits are detrimental to the child.

                      Mich Admin Code R 400.12421(d)

                      An agency shall have a policy regarding visitation and parenting
                      time that contains provisions for visits between siblings who are not
                      placed together except when there is a court determination that
                      visits are detrimental to either child





