                                      OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                      FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       1 of 19
                                      PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                            1-1-2025


OVERVIEW

                      Efforts must be made to find families for older youth in care and to
                      identify placement options that provide age-appropriate opportuni-
                      ties and responsibilities. Youth, ages 14-21, must be involved in
                      placement decisions. Youth are a valuable resource in identifying
                      individuals who might be available to serve as placements.

                      For placement preference, a relative is defined as an individual who
                      is at least 18 years of age and related to the child within the fifth
                      degree by blood, marriage, or adoption, including the spouse of an
                      individual related to the child within the fifth degree, even after the
                      marriage has ended by death or divorce, the parent who shares
                      custody of a half-sibling, and the parent of a man whom the court
                      has found probable cause to believe is the putative father if there is
                      no man with legally established rights to the child.

                      A relative may also be an individual who is at least 18 years of age
                      and not related to a child within the fifth degree by blood, marriage,
                      or adoption but who has a strong positive emotional tie to or role in
                      the child's life or the child's parent's life if the child is an infant, as
                      determined by the department or, if the child is an Indian child, as
                      determined solely by the Indian child's tribe. As described under
                      MCL 712a.13a.

                      Placement preference must be given to an adult related to the child
                      within the fifth degree by blood, marriage, or adoption provided the
                      relative meets all relevant state child protection standards.
                      Consideration should also be given to adults not related to a child
                      within the fifth degree by blood, marriage, or adoption but who has
                      a strong positive emotional tie or role in the child's life or the child's
                      parent's life if the child is an infant, as determined by the
                      department. The department can override this decision with good
                      cause.

                      Good cause means the following:

                      •    A request by one or both of the child's parents to deviate from
                           this preference.

                      •    The child's request, if the child is of sufficient age and capacity
                           to understand the decision that is being made.

                      •    The presence of a sibling attachment that can be maintained
                           through a particular placement.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                                STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                   FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       2 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                         1-1-2025


                      •    The child's physical, mental, or emotional needs, such as
                           specialized treatment services that may be unavailable in the
                           community where families who meet the placement
                           preferences live.

                      •    The distance between the child's home and the proposed
                           family placement would frustrate the reunification goal or
                           otherwise impede permanency.

INDEPENDENT
LIVING
PREPARATION

                      Independent living preparation is required for all youth in out of
                      home placement age 14 and older, regardless of their permanency
                      planning goal. The purpose of independent living preparation is to
                      assist youth in transitioning to self-sufficiency. Once the youth is
                      age 14, the case manager must document the independent living
                      services provided and goals for future services in the following
                      documents, as applicable:

                      •    DHS-441a, Parent-Agency Treatment Plan.
                      •    DHS-442a, Permanent Ward Treatment Plan.
                      •    DHS-4789, Juvenile Justice Initial Service Plan.
                      •    DHS-4789, Juvenile Justice Updated Service Plan.
                      •    DHS-4789, Supplemental Updated Services Plan.

                      Provision of services does not equate to achievement of
                      permanency. Reasonable efforts to achieve permanency must still
                      be provided; see FOM 722-07, Permanency Planning - Overview,
                      for all permanency planning goal requirements.

 Life Skills
 Assessment

                      The Casey Life Skills Assessment (CLSA) is a free, online youth-
                      centered tool that assesses the life skills that youth need for their
                      well-being, confidence, and safety, as they navigate high school,
                      post-secondary education, employment, and other life milestones.
                      The CLSA must be completed within 90-calendar days of a youth
                      turning 14 years of age, and annually thereafter.

                      For youth who are 14 years of age or older when they enter care,
                      the assessment should be completed within 90-calendar days of
                      entering care. The CLSA can be accessed by downloading the



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                   FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       3 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                         1-1-2025


                      toolkit and accepting the terms of agreement. Once downloaded
                      the case manager should do one of the following:

                      •    Print the assessment for the youth to complete.

                      •    Have the youth complete the assessment in the excel
                           document within the toolkit, which will then provide a tab with a
                           results bar graph.

                      For youth who are placed in a child caring institution (CCI), the CCI
                      must ensure completion of the CLSA and provide the results to the
                      case manager.

                      If a youth is functioning at a level that prevents use of the CLSA,
                      the case manager must identify another validated tool appropriate
                      to the youth's functional needs and request approval for use of the
                      tool by sending it to the Child Welfare Policy mailbox (Child-
                      Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov) or the Juvenile Justice Policy
                      mailbox (Juvenile-Justice-Policy@michigan.gov).

                      Independent living preparation skills are assessed for each youth
                      as being adequate or inadequate on the Child Assessment of
                      Needs and Strengths (CANS) or the Juvenile Justice Strength and
                      Needs Assessment; see FOM 722-09, Child Assessment of Needs
                      and Strengths (CANS).

                      For youth aged 14 or older, a written description must be included
                      in the youth's treatment plan of the programs and services which
                      will help the youth take care of oneself across all domains.
                      Examples of age-appropriate services include, but are not limited
                      to:

                      •    Daily living skills.
                      •    Preventive health services.
                      •    Self-care skills.
                      •    Relationship and communication.
                      •    Housing and transportation.
                      •    Money management.
                      •    Work and study life.
                      •    Career and education planning.
                      •    Civic engagement.
                      •    Navigating the child welfare system.
                      •    Looking forward.
                      •    Mentoring - a youth must be connected to an adult who will
                           guide and support them as a parent would after the youth's
                           case is closed.

CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                    OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                  FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       4 of 19
                                    PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                        1-1-2025


                      In addition to the CLSA for youth aged 14 and up, the toolkit
                      includes other assessments that should be considered for use with
                      youth when appropriate. These supplemental assessments include:

                      •    CLSA for American Indian/Alaskan Native.
                      •    CLSA for youth identifying as LGBTQ+.
                      •    CLSA for parenting infants.
                      •    CLSA for parenting young children.
                      •    CLSA for youth ages 5-11.
                      •    CLSA for youth ages 10-14.
                      •    Support system (assesses a youth's formal and informal
                           support system).
 Youth Involvement

                      To prepare for independent living, the youth must be offered the
                      opportunity to participate in quarterly family team meetings (FTM);
                      see FOM 722-06B, Family Team Meeting. Youth must be involved
                      in the development of their case service plan. The level of
                      involvement in the plan and the services provided are dependent
                      upon the youth’s preference and developmental abilities.

                      If a youth is unavailable or declines to sign or be involved in the
                      development of the case service plan, the case manager must
                      identify, and document additional actions needed to secure the
                      youth’s participation in case service planning and implementation of
                      the treatment plan.

 Case Plan Team
 Members

                      Beginning at age 14, youth may select one or more adults who are
                      not the youth's caregiver or case manager to be part of their case
                      planning team. The team member's role is to be the youth’s advisor
                      and advocate for the youth's permanency, well-being, and normalcy
                      through the application of the DHS-5307, Rights and
                      Responsibilities of Children and Youth in Foster Care; see FOM
                      722-06J, Rights of Children in Foster Care. The team member will
                      assist the youth in developing their case plan by participating in
                      semi-annual transition meetings, applicable FTMs, and the 90-day
                      discharge meeting; see FOM 722-06B, Family Team Meeting.

                      The individuals selected by the youth may be denied at any time if
                      there is good cause to believe that the individual would not act in
                      the best interest of the youth. The case manager must document
                      the reasons for denying an individual chosen by the youth, in the
                      case service plan.


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                           STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                      OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                   FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C        5 of 19
                                      PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                         1-1-2025


                       Note: Youth who have a juvenile justice case and no foster care
                       case have no FTM requirement.

 Caregiver’s Role

                       The youth's caregiver is an invaluable resource regarding
                       independent living preparation, training in daily living skills,
                       budgeting, and providing a support system for youth as they
                       transition out of the foster care or juvenile justice system. The case
                       manager must detail the activities that the caregiver will provide to
                       assist the youth in the youth's treatment plan.

INDEPENDENT
LIVING PLACEMENT

                       Placement in independent living may be an acceptable living
                       arrangement for youth 16 years or older. Prior to placement in
                       independent living, the case manager must assess the youth, with
                       the CLSA, as being prepared for independent living and
                       demonstrate a pattern of mature decision making.

 Assessment and
 Preparation of
 Youth

                       Independent living skills must be assessed for each youth as being
                       adequate or inadequate based on the CANS or the Juvenile Justice
                       Strength and Needs Assessment, and the CLSA. Provision of
                       independent living services must be documented within the youth's
                       service plan, as well as the plan for services for any independent
                       living need identified as inadequate.

 Independent Living
 Program
 Statement

                       A copy of the supervising agency’s independent living program
                       (ILP) statement must be given to the youth before placement in
                       independent living.

 Independent Living
 Agreement

                       The youth must be involved in the development of and sign the indi-
                       vidualized independent living agreement. The DHS-4527,
                       Independent Living Agreement, must be reviewed and updated
                       quarterly. If no changes are required, the youth and the case


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                  FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       6 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                        1-1-2025


                      manager must indicate that this review has occurred by re-signing
                      and dating the agreement. If changes are required, a new
                      agreement must be completed and approved.

                      Supervisory Approval

                      The supervisor must review and approve, by signature, all initial
                      and updated independent living agreements.

 Case Service Plan
 Documentation

                      When a youth resides in an independent living placement, the case
                      service plan must document the following:

                      •    The services provided and goals for future services that will
                           help the youth maintain independent living successfully and
                           prepare the youth for functional independence.

                      •    Independent living is the most appropriate placement for the
                           youth.

                      •    The youth exhibits maturity in self-care and personal
                           judgement.

                      •    The case manager has personally observed that the living
                           situation provides suitable social, emotional, and physical care.

                      •    The youth has adequate financial support to meet their
                           housing, clothing, food, and miscellaneous needs.

                      •    An evaluation of the youth's need for supervision. The case
                           manager must have face-to-face contact with the youth as
                           described in FOM 722-06H, Case Contacts, or JJM 270,
                           Juvenile Justice Specialists Contact Requirements.

                      •    If the youth is a parent of a child who is 0 to 12 months old,
                           safe sleep guidelines should be discussed. More information
                           can be found at the Michigan Department of Health and
                           Human Services (MDHHS) Safe Sleep for Infants webpage.

                      •    The youth was provided with a phone number to contact the
                           agency on a 24-hour, 7-day-a-week basis.

                      •    The youth has a positive relationship with at least one
                           consistent, reliable adult.



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                       OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C        7 of 19
                                       PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                      1-1-2025


 Case Manager
 Responsibility

                       Case managers maintain responsibility for monitoring youth in inde-
                       pendent living placements. The same policy requirements that
                       apply to other foster care or juvenile justice cases apply to cases
                       involving youth placed in independent living.

 Independent Living
 Stipend

                       The case manager is required to provide reasonable efforts to
                       assist the youth in meeting the requirements of the independent
                       living agreement. Documentation of these efforts must be included
                       in the case service plan. If a youth is not able to meet the
                       requirements listed in the independent living agreement, alternative
                       placement should be sought, however the youth's independent
                       living stipend should not be stopped.

PLACEMENT IN AN
ADULT CARE
FACILITY

                       State law allows for placement of a person under the age of 18 in a
                       licensed adult foster care (AFC) family home or in a licensed AFC
                       small or medium group home under certain circumstances; see
                       MCL 722.115. Placement in an adult care facility may be
                       considered for a youth under the age of 18 if it is the most
                       appropriate, least restrictive setting. Placement in an adult care
                       facility is authorized through a variance process; see Request for
                       Authorization. The supervising agency retains supervisory
                       responsibility for any youth placed in an adult care facility.

 Placement Criteria

                       Prior to requesting authorization for placement in an adult care
                       facility, the supervising agency must ensure the placement meets
                       the following criteria:

                       •    Is in the best interests of the youth.

                       •    Has the approval of the youth's parent, guardian, or Michigan's
                            Children's Institute (MCI) Superintendent.

                       •    Has the capacity to meet the youth's identified needs.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                      OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                  FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       8 of 19
                                      PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                        1-1-2025


                      •    The youth's psychosocial and clinical needs must be
                           compatible with those of other residents.

                      •    For juvenile justice youth, the placement must protect
                           community safety.

                      •    The youth's level of cognitive functioning is consistent with that
                           of other residents.

                      If approved, the case manager must reevaluate the placement
                      quarterly to determine that these criteria continue to be met. The
                      case manager must document the continued appropriateness of the
                      placement in the youth's case service plan.

 Request for
 Authorization

                      The supervising agency must request the appropriate variance
                      request form from Division of Child Welfare Licensing (DCWL). The
                      request must be signed by a supervisor from the supervising
                      agency and submitted to DCWL. The request must contain the
                      following information:

                      •    The name of the provider, the name of the facility and the
                           license number must be included. The license number must
                           begin with the prefix AF, AS, or AM.

                      •    Information about the youth including:

                                Name, date of birth, and gender.

                                A description of the youth’s psychosocial and clinical
                                needs.

                                The prescribed clinical treatment for the youth’s condition.

                                A description of the youth’s cognitive level.

                                A description of the youth’s developmental disability,
                                mental illness, or physical disability.

                                Medical documentation that the youth is physically limited
                                to such a degree as to require complete physical
                                assistance with mobility and activities of daily living.

                                Any history of known trauma.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                             STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                        OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                 FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C          9 of 19
                                        PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                       1-1-2025


                                  An assessment of the youth’s immediate and long-term
                                  need for foster care.

                         •    Verification that the above placement criteria has been met.

                         Review of Request

                         DCWL and the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs
                         (LARA) Adult Foster Care and Home for the Aged (AFC/HA)
                         Licensing Division will review the variance request and make a
                         coordinated decision regarding the youth's placement in the adult
                         care facility. DCWL will provide the final decision in writing to the
                         supervising agency and the adult foster home indicating approval or
                         denial of the request. Placement in the adult care facility must not
                         occur prior to written approval from DCWL.

SERVICES TO
OLDER YOUTH

 Young Adult
 Voluntary Foster
 Care

                         Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care (YAVFC) offers eligible foster
                         youth ages 18, 19, and 20 who were in state-supervised foster
                         care, under an abuse/neglect order, at the age of 18 or older to
                         extend foster care maintenance payments until age 21; see FOM
                         722-16, Young Adult Voluntary Foster Care.

 Services to
 Michigan
 Children's Institute
 Wards until Age 20

                         Youth committed to MCI who chose not to participate in YAVFC
                         may remain in foster care and continue to receive payments until
                         age 20, either in family foster care or independent living; see FOM
                         901-8, Fund Sources.

                         MCI commitment will end on the 19th birthday and the youth's legal
                         status will change to 51, former MCI ward.

                         Note: Determination of care (DOC) rates cannot be paid to a foster
                         parent and administrative rates cannot be paid to a placement
                         agency foster care (PAFC) provider once the youth reaches age
                         19.



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                              STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                          OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                     FOB 2025-001
    FOM 722-03C           10 of 19
                                          PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                           1-1-2025


 Title IV-E Eligibility
 for Youth after Age
 18

                           For information pertaining to Title IV-E eligibility for youth after age
                           18 see FOM 902, Funding Determinations and Title IV-E Eligibility.

 Youth in Transition
 Funding

                           The John H. Chafee Foster Care Program for Successful Transition
                           to Adulthood, called Youth in Transition (YIT), can assist with goods
                           and services for youth who are in an eligible out of home placement
                           after the age of 14 and have not yet reached the age of 23; see
                           FOM 950, The Youth in Transition (YIT) Program.

 Education and
 Training Voucher

                           The Chafee Education and Training Voucher Program (ETV)
                           provides resources specifically to meet the education and training
                           needs of youth aging out of foster care. This program provides
                           vouchers of up to $5,000 per fiscal year to eligible youth attending
                           post-secondary education and vocational programs up to age 26;
                           see FOM 960, Education and Training Voucher (ETV) Program.
                           The amount available each year is determined by available federal
                           and state funds.

 Driver's Training

                           Youth who are in foster care should have the opportunity to obtain
                           a driver's license. Case managers may be able to access YIT funds
                           for driver's education courses; see FOM 903-09, Case Service
                           Payments and FOM 950, The Youth in Transition (YIT) Program.

 State Identification
 Card

                           Any youth aged 16 and older who does not have a Michigan
                           driver's license should obtain a State of Michigan identification card.
                           The case manager must assist the youth with obtaining an
                           identification card from the local Secretary of State office.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                                   STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                      OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                 FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C        11 of 19
                                      PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                       1-1-2025


 Consumer Credit
 Reports

                       Case managers must request annual credit reports for youth ages
                       14-18 and assist youth 18 and older with obtaining a consumer
                       credit report; see FOM 722-06E, Consumer Credit Reports.

 Michigan Works!
 Agency (MW!A)
 Referral

                       Case managers may refer youth who are 16 years and older and in
                       need of employment skills training to the local Michigan Works!
                       Agency (MW!A) for participation in any available youth employment
                       programs using the DHS-348, Michigan Works!/Workforce
                       Innovation and Opportunity Act Agency Referral Foster Care Youth.

 Voter Registration
 Information

                       At least 90-calendar days prior to a youth turning 18 years of age,
                       and annually thereafter, the case manager will provide voter
                       registration information. Updated brochures can be found at the
                       Secretary of State website.

 Pregnant and
 Parenting Youth

                       Youth in foster care, including youth in YAVFC, who are parenting,
                       pregnant, or expecting a biological child may be eligible for
                       prevention services through the Family First Prevention Services
                       Act (FFPSA); see SRM 108, Prevention Services: Family First
                       Prevention Services Act. Youth with children in the same
                       placement; see FOM 903-03, Payment for Foster/Relative Care for
                       payment policy.

OLDER YOUTH
EXITING THE
FOSTER CARE
SYSTEM

                       Older youth exiting the foster care or juvenile justice system
                       encounter additional obstacles and many are not prepared to meet
                       financial, health, social, and educational challenges. Youth can
                       benefit from additional time in care to improve proficiency and
                       receive maximum benefit in these areas. Age alone must not be



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                   FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       12 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                           1-1-2025


                      used as a reason for closure for youth who continue to be
                      eligible for foster care or YAVFC services.

 Assessment
 Factors for Case
 Closing Decisions
 for Older Youth

                      Youth requesting case closure must be actively involved in the
                      assessment of these criteria. Decisions to close a case prior to a
                      youth reaching age 21 must be based on an assessment of the
                      following criteria:

                      Permanent Connections

                      •    Does the youth have an identified adult who can assist the
                           youth as a parent would?

                      •    Is the identified adult willing to make a commitment to assume
                           this role for the youth?

                      Housing

                      •    Has the youth obtained suitable housing that can be
                           maintained with the youth’s available resources?

                      •    Has a referral for housing assistance been made?

                      Education

                      •    Does the youth have a Graduate Educational Diploma (GED)
                           or high school diploma?

                      •    Is the youth aware of opportunities for post-secondary
                           education or training?

                      •    Does the youth plan to attend college?

                      •    Is a funding plan in place?

                      Employment

                      •    Has the youth participated in job training or exploration?

                      •    Has the youth been referred to agencies to assist with
                           employment, through the Workforce Innovation and
                           Opportunity Act (WIOA) at the local Michigan Works! Agency?



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                  FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C       13 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                         1-1-2025


                      •    Does the youth have the training and education necessary to
                           pursue desired employment?

                      •    Is the youth employed?

                      Financial Literacy

                      •    Does the youth have sufficient income to support themself?

                      •    Does the youth have an established bank account, either
                           checking or savings?

                      •    Does the youth know how to write a check, pay bills, budget,
                           and save money, and comparison shop?

                      Daily Living Skills

                      •    Does the youth possess basic living skills such as cooking,
                           cleaning, personal care, laundry, time management, and the
                           ability to access community resources?

                      •    Does the youth have access to transportation?

                      •    If youth is disabled, has a referral for Supplemental Security
                           Income (SSI) determination been made?

                      Healthy Behaviors

                      •    Does the youth make responsible choices in the areas of
                           relationships, health and well-being, substance use, and
                           medical care?

 Requests for Case
 Closure Against
 Recommendation

                      If the youth requests case closure prior to the age of 21, against
                      case manager recommendation, the case manager must document
                      the concerns in the case service plan. The youth’s signature is
                      required on the DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action
                      Summary, as acknowledgement that the youth participated in the
                      evaluation of the Assessment Factors for Case Closing Decisions
                      for Older Youth, listed above, and is still requesting closure despite
                      the case manager’s recommendation.

                      In addition, youth older than 18 years of age who are requesting
                      case closure prior to 21 years of age must be provided information


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                        OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,               FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C        14 of 19
                                        PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                     1-1-2025


                       about the availability of re-entering care under the YAVFC program,
                       including who they can contact if they choose to.

 Foster Care Case
 Closure Without
 Permanency

                       All youth under the supervision of MDHHS must achieve one of the
                       five federal goals before the case can be closed, see FOM 722-07,
                       Permanency Planning - Overview.

                       In extraordinary circumstances, permanency may not be achieved
                       for older youth. Some examples include but are not limited to:

                       •    Youth absent without legal permission (AWOLP) for more than
                            six months who have had no contact with the supervising
                            agency.

                       •    Youth who refuse to cooperate with the case manager.

                       •    Youth incarcerated or hospitalized for an extended time period.

                       In these cases, the following must occur prior to case closure:

                       •    Active and extraordinary efforts to achieve permanency must
                            be documented in the case service plan.

                       •    Approval from the second line supervisor in the case service
                            plan. If it has been less than 30-calendar days since the last
                            case service plan was completed, this can be documented in a
                            social work contact.

 Discharge Criteria
 for State Wards
 (Act 220 or Act
 296)

                       Although a youth can remain in care until their 21st birthday, a
                       youth committed to MCI remains a ward of the state until age 19 or
                       until the youth is discharged sooner by the MCI superintendent.
                       Reasons for early discharge include:

                       •    Adoption.

                       •    Marriage, if the youth is under age 18.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                   FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C      15 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                         1-1-2025


                      •   Emancipation, or release of the rights of custody over a ward
                          under age 18. Emancipation occurs by court order pursuant to
                          a petition filed by the minor with the Family Division of Circuit
                          Court and includes a declaration by the minor of self-
                          sufficiency with respect to their financial, social, and personal
                          affairs. Requirements for emancipation are:

                                The petition for emancipation.

                                An affidavit to accompany the petition declaring that an
                                individual has personal knowledge of the minor's
                                circumstances, is convinced of the minor's ability to be
                                self-sufficient, and believes that emancipation is in the
                                best interests of the minor.

                                An approved DHS-1476, Early Discharge of MCI Ward.

                      Requesting MCI Superintendent's Written Consent

                      Discharge for a ward prior to age 19 requires only the MCI superin-
                      tendent's written consent. Prior to requesting consent from the MCI
                      superintendent, case managers must review the Assessment
                      Factors for Case Closing Decisions for Older Youth in this item and
                      document the outcome in the case service plan.

                      To request consent, case managers must complete the DHS-1476,
                      Early Discharge of MCI Ward, and send the form to:

                          Michigan Children’s Institute
                          235 S. Grand Ave, Suite 514
                          Lansing, MI 48909
                          FAX: 517-335-6177

                      The MCI superintendent will make a decision regarding the request
                      and return the DHS-1476, Early Discharge of MCI Ward, to the
                      case manager.

 90-Day Discharge
 Planning Meeting

                      A 90-Day Discharge Planning meeting must be held between 60
                      and 90-calendar days prior to a planned case closure for any youth
                      exiting care at age 16 or older. For an unplanned case closure, the
                      90-Day Discharge Planning meeting must occur within 30 days
                      after the case closes. The 90-Day Discharge Planning meeting is
                      held to engage youth and to ensure that they can participate in their



CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                  FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C      16 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                        1-1-2025


                      own discharge planning; see FOM 722-06B, Family Team
                      Meetings.

AFTERCARE
SERVICES

                      In addition to the items below, case managers must inform youth of
                      any additional services, such as local resources, that may be
                      available after case closure.

 Housing Resource
 Referral

                      All youth aged 18 and older without an identified housing situation
                      at the time of case closure must be referred to a housing resource.
                      Housing resources include homeless youth and runaway con-
                      tractors and other local housing resources.

                      Homeless Youth and Runaway Contractors-Transitional Living
                      Program

                      Homeless youth and runaway contractors must serve both
                      homeless and runaway youth. Former foster youth are a specified
                      population for homeless youth services through their transitional liv-
                      ing program. Contractors must ensure 25 percent of their clients
                      are youth that have transitioned from foster care.

                      A Homeless Youth and Runaway Contractors list can be found at
                      the MDHHS Foster Youth in Transition - Housing homepage.

                      Referral Process

                      The case manager must complete the DHS-956, Foster Youth
                      Housing Referral. The original must be sent to the local homeless
                      youth and runaway contractor and a copy must be emailed to the
                      attention of the Homeless Youth and Runaway Analyst at the Child
                      Welfare Policy Mailbox (Child-Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov).

                      The homeless youth and runaway contractor must contact the
                      youth within 72 hours of receiving the referral.

                      Eligibility

                      Youth are not eligible for services under the homeless youth and
                      runaway contract while the foster care or juvenile justice case is
                      open, including youth who are AWOLP. However, the contractor
                      may meet with the youth, the case manager, and other identified


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                            STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                     OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                     FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C      17 of 19
                                     PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                           1-1-2025


                      service providers, for up to two months prior to case closure to
                      ensure a successful transition from foster care to the transitional
                      living program.

                      Note: The housing plan and the youth’s consent must be
                      documented in the final case service plan.

                      Documentation

                      Before case closure, case managers must document in the service
                      plan that referrals were made, and the following actions were
                      completed:

                      •   Diligently pursued multiple living arrangements and housing
                          options.

                      •   Assessed the reasons independent living with case
                          management services was not an option.

                      •   Contacted the area homeless youth and runaway contractor
                          and verified an opening for the youth upon case closure.

 Foster Care
 Transitional
 Medicaid

                      Most youth who exit care after turning 18 years of age are eligible
                      for Foster Care Transitional Medicaid (FCTMA). For eligibility
                      criteria, enrollment procedures, youth notification of eligibility, and
                      system actions; see FOM 803, Medicaid - Foster Care.

 Supplemental
 Security Income

                      The Social Security Administration (SSA) recognizes that
                      Supplemental Security Income (SSI) financial support and health
                      benefits help ease the transition from care.

                      Case managers must ensure a timely transition by facilitating the
                      SSI application process at SSA with the youth; see FOM 902-12,
                      Government and Other Benefits.




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                              STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                    OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                 FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C      18 of 19
                                    PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                       1-1-2025


 Durable Power of
 Attorney

                      A durable power of attorney for health care allows youth to be in
                      control of their health in the absence of the ability to make deci-
                      sions about their health care treatment. Youth can choose
                      someone they trust to make such decisions on their behalf. All
                      youth age 18 and older who are still under the care and supervision
                      of MDHHS and are exiting care can establish a durable power of
                      attorney for health care; see FOM 722-06C, Durable Power of
                      Attorney for Health Care.

 Discharge
 Documents

                      For documents that the case manager must provide to the parents
                      or legal guardians of youth exiting care, as well as specific
                      documents that must be provided to youth leaving care at age 18 or
                      older or due to legal emancipation by court order, see FOM 722-15,
                      Case Closing.

RESOURCES

                      •   DHS-5307, Rights and Responsibilities of Children and Youth
                          in Foster Care.

                      •   DHS-4527, Independent Living Agreement.

                      •   DHS-348, Michigan Works!/Workforce Innovation and
                          Opportunity Act Agency Referral.

                      •   DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action Summary.

                      •   DHS-1476, Early Discharge of MCI Ward.

                      •   DHS-956, Foster Youth Housing Referral.

LEGAL BASE

 Federal Law

                      Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 675(1)(D)

                      Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 675(1)(B)

                      Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 675(5)(D)

                      Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 675(5)(I)


CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                          STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                              DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
                                    OLDER YOUTH: PREPARATION,                FOB 2025-001
   FOM 722-03C      19 of 19
                                    PLACEMENT, AND DISCHARGE                      1-1-2025


                      45 CFR 1356.21(o)

 State Law

                      The Child Care Organizations Act, 1973 PA 116, as amended,
                      MCL 722.111(e)

                      The Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, 1979 PA 218,
                      MCL 400.701

                      Michigan Children's Institute, 1935 PA 220, MCL 400.201 et
                      seq.

                      Probate Code, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.2a

                      Foster Care and Adoption Services Act, 1994 PA 203, MCL
                      722.954c

 Licensing Rule

                      Mich Admin Code, R400.12501 - R400.12509

POLICY CONTACT

                      Questions about this policy item may be directed to the Child
                      Welfare Policy Mailbox (Child-Welfare-Policy@michigan.gov).




CHILDREN'S FOSTER CARE MANUAL                                         STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                              DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
