
OVERVIEW

                      Every effort must be made to ensure the educational needs of all
                      children in foster care are met. The supervising agency must
                      ensure that children in the care of the Michigan Department of
                      Health and Human Services (MDHHS) are provided appropriate
                      educational services to support and encourage school success.
                      The supervising agency is responsible for monitoring the provision
                      of educational services to ensure identified needs are being
                      addressed.

COMPULSORY
SCHOOL
ATTENDANCE

                      Minimum Age

                      Children who are six years of age by December 1st of the school
                      year must be enrolled and attending school.

                      Maximum Age

                      Children are required to attend school until they graduate or
                      successfully complete a General Educational Development (GED)
                      program.

EDUCATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS

                      All children in foster care must meet one of the following conditions:

                      •    Is a full-time elementary or secondary student.
                      •    Has completed secondary education.
                      •    Is incapable of attending school on a full-time basis due to the
                           child’s medical condition. Incapacity must be supported by
                           annual information submitted by a medical provider.

                      Note: The required supporting documentation of full-time school
                      attendance, school completion, or medical incapacity must be
                      documented in the case service plan and updated in the education
                      section of the electronic case record.

SCHOOL
ENROLLMENT

                      School-aged children must be registered for and attending school
                      within five school days of initial placement or any placement




                      change, including while placed in child caring institutions (CCI) or
                      emergency placements.

EVERY STUDENT
SUCCEEDS ACT
(ESSA)

                      The federal Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) of 2015 requires
                      state education agencies ensure education stability for students
                      who are in foster care. This includes requiring that school staff
                      collaborate with child welfare staff to make best interest
                      determinations for school placement.

                      ESSA requires that every local school district identify a foster care
                      liaison. The local school district's foster care liaison is required to
                      collaborate with foster care staff when considering school
                      placement and to help arrange transportation when needed.

 School District
 Foster Care
 Liaisons

                      Every local school district is required to have a foster care liaison
                      identified.

                      School district foster care liaisons can be found in the Educational
                      Entity Master (EEM) database. Instructions for how to find the
                      liaison are as follows:

                      •    Click "search" on the left.

                      •    Select "quick".

                      •    Under "entity name" type in the name of the local school
                           district, not the building.

                      •    Click "search".

                      •    Select the district from the list, there may be several pages to
                           look through, click on the blue underlined name.

                      •    Scroll to the bottom of the page.

                      •    Under the admin/contacts tab, using the scroll bar, find "foster
                           care liaison".

                      The school district liaison will:




                      •    Coordinate with the corresponding child welfare agency point-
                           of-contact and the foster care case manager on the
                           implementation of the ESSA provisions.

                      •    Assist with education placement best interest determination.

                      •    Facilitate the transfer of records and immediate enrollment.

                      •    Facilitate data sharing with the child welfare agencies,
                           consistent with Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
                           (FERPA) and other privacy protocols.

                      •    Collaborate with the child welfare agency point-of-contact and
                           the foster care case manager to develop and coordinate local
                           transportation procedures.

                      •    Manage best interest determinations and transportation cost
                           disputes.

                      •    Ensure that children in foster care are enrolled in and regularly
                           attending school.

                      •    Provide professional development and training to school staff
                           on the ESSA provisions and on educational needs of children
                           in foster care.

 MDHHS Education
 Point-of-Contact

                      Every county MDHHS office will have an education point-of-contact
                      identified. This point-of-contact will:

                      •    Receive initial and ongoing training when new education
                           policy/law goes into effect that will cause a change in case
                           manager protocol.

                      •    Share information with MDHHS offices and private agencies.

                      •    Serve as the primary contact for school district foster care
                           liaisons.

                      •    Connect education staff with assigned foster care case
                           managers, when needed.

                      •    Provide technical assistance to foster care case managers with
                           transportation paperwork.





                      •    If assisting with an individual case, notify the case manager so
                           that it can be documented within the electronic case record.

                      •    Collaborate with district foster care liaisons regarding
                           transportation plans and payment.

EDUCATION
PLACEMENT

                      Children entering foster care or changing foster care placements
                      must continue their education in the local school district of origin
                      whenever possible and if in the child’s best interest. The proximity
                      of the caregiver home to the child’s school is to be considered at
                      initial placement and when changing a child's placement.

 Best Interest
 Determination

                      The case manager must discuss best interest factors with the
                      school district foster care liaison, parent, foster parent/relative
                      caregiver, guardian, and child when appropriate, regarding school
                      placement. Best interest factors include but are not limited to:

                      •    The parent/legal guardian and child’s preference.

                      •    Input from the school district foster care liaison and other
                           school staff.

                      •    The child’s:

                                Social and emotional state.
                                Academic achievement/strengths.
                                Extra-curricular activity participation.

                      •    Continuity of relationships.

                      •    Special education programming.

                      •    Supportive relationships and/or services.

                      •    Length of anticipated stay in placement.

                      •    Distance/travel time to and from current school/new placement
                           and impact on the child.

                      Note: The cost of transportation to the school of origin cannot be
                      considered when reviewing best interest factors.




 School Foster Care
 Liaison
 Involvement

                       When making the education placement best interest determination,
                       the school district foster care liaison and other school staff should
                       be involved. The local school district can:

                       •    Provide input on academic, social, and emotional impact that
                            changing schools may have on the child's wellbeing, progress,
                            and services.

                       •    Help determine which programs at the two schools are
                            comparable and appropriate for the child.

                       •    Provide information on the commute to the schools in terms of
                            the distance, mode of transportation, and travel time.

 Parent and Child
 Involvement

                       Case managers must engage both the parent(s)/legal guardian(s)
                       and the child in the best interest determination.

 School Placement
 Decision

                       As included in the Michigan Revised School Code, when a
                       consensus cannot be reached between the foster care staff and the
                       school district foster care liaison regarding where a child should
                       attend school, the foster care staff, either MDHHS or placing
                       agency foster care (PAFC), will make the decision, between the
                       local school district of origin or the local school district of residence,
                       giving preference to the child and parent's wishes.

                       Neither the local school district of origin nor the local school district
                       of residence can deny enrollment for a child who is in foster care.
                       This includes when there is a lack of paperwork, including
                       immunization records or birth certificate.

                       If the foster parent or relative caregiver prefers the child attend a
                       school that is not within the local school district of origin or the local
                       school district of residence, they can apply for school-of-choice, if
                       applicable. MDHHS is not able to assist with education
                       transportation expense if enrolling in a school-of-choice option. All
                       decisions about where to enroll the child must consider the child
                       and parent's wishes.




 School Change

                      If remaining in the school of origin is not in the best interest of the
                      child, the case service plan must document that:

                      •    The child was enrolled immediately into the school of
                           residence, within five school days.

                      •    Assist with the transfer of educational records of the child to
                           the new school.

 Transfer of
 Student Records
 to New School

                      When a child in foster care has a school change, public schools are
                      required to request a copy of the CA-60, the Cumulative Record
                      Folder, from the child's previous school within 14 school days after
                      enrolling the transfer student. The sending school must forward a
                      copy of the records within 30 school days of the request.

                      If the child’s foster care case record does not contain the most
                      recent school records, such as the report card, discipline records,
                      or Individualized Education Plan (IEP), if applicable, the case
                      manager must request copies of educational records from the last
                      school attended within five-days of enrolling the child in the new
                      school, using the DHS-942, School Notification and Education
                      Records Release. This will ensure the child will be placed in the
                      appropriate classes and receive any needed special
                      accommodations immediately, without having to wait for the
                      transfer of the full CA-60, Cumulative Record Folder.

 DHS-942, School
 Notification and
 Records Release

                      The Uninterrupted Scholars Act amended the Family Educational
                      Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) to allow schools to release
                      education records to child welfare case managers or other
                      representatives of a state or local child welfare agency or tribal
                      organization without parental consent for the purpose of school
                      enrollment and case planning. As soon as a school move is
                      expected, or any time a child changes school placement, a request
                      for educational records must be sent to the former school. The case
                      manager must request student records using the DHS-942, School
                      Notification and Education Records Release. Requested records
                      should include, but are not limited to:



                      •    Grades/unofficial transcript.
                      •    Attendance.
                      •    Special education records (if applicable).
                      •    Disciplinary records.

                      The DHS-942 is also to be used to ensure that schools are aware
                      when a student is in foster care or has moved foster home
                      placements. It should be sent to the school district foster care
                      liaison at the following points:

                      •    When a student first enters foster care, whether a school move
                           is required or not.

                      •    Any time a student moves foster home placements while in
                           care, whether a school move is required or not.

                      •    Any time a student transfers schools.

                      •    When there is a case manager change, to notify the school of
                           new contact information.

                      •    When a case manager is completing the case service plan and
                           is requesting updated education information.

                      •    When a foster care case closes.

 Transfer of
 Student Records
 to Placement

                      Any time a child changes placement, including initial placements
                      and reunification, all of the child's available student records, such
                      as report cards or IEPs contained in the foster care case file must
                      be provided to the new caregiver, foster parent, relative, legal
                      parent/guardian, provider.

                      Student records must be provided to the new caregiver, at the time
                      of placement but no later than two-weeks from the placement date.
                      Documentation of the transfer of student records must be
                      completed on the DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action
                      Summary, and uploaded within the electronic case record; see
                      FOM 722-08E, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action Summary.






CASE MANAGER’S
ROLE

                      The case manager’s role is to coordinate with school personnel to
                      ensure the child’s educational needs are identified and the child is
                      provided the necessary educational services. In coordinating these
                      efforts, the case manager must:

                      •    Initiate the best interest determination discussion when any
                           foster care placement change occurs. The case manager must
                           discuss best interest factors with the school district foster care
                           liaison, parents, foster parents, relative caregivers, guardians,
                           and the child, when appropriate, to make the school placement
                           decision.

                      •    Send the DHS-942, School Notification and Education Records
                           Release, to the school district foster care liaison at the time of
                           every new placement, including initial placement, whether
                           there is school placement change or not. This ensures that all
                           updated placement information is provided to the school.

                      •    Provide the school district foster care liaison information
                           needed regarding the child and placement as early as possible
                           but no later than three business days from any foster care
                           placement/replacement. If new placement information is known
                           prior to the actual move, the advance notice to the school
                           district foster care liaison should assist in facilitating
                           educational stability.

                      •    Consult with parents, foster parents, relative caregivers, school
                           staff, and the student to determine if education needs are met.
                           This should be documented within the social work contact
                           section of the electronic case record.

                      •    Obtain information from the school district foster care liaison
                           and other school staff for use in assessing the child’s
                           educational needs and strengths and to report on progress.

                      •    For children placed outside of the school of origin, coordinate
                           with the district foster care liaisons in both districts, to make a
                           best interest determination for school selection and placement.

                      •    Document all contacts and information exchanged in the social
                           work contact section of the electronic case record.






                      •    Update the education section of the electronic case record
                           within five business days if a school move is required.

                      •    Update the education section of the electronic case record at
                           the end of each school year to reflect grade advancement.
                           Each school year should be end dated with an end grade
                           listed.

                      •    Send the DHS-942, School Notification and Education Records
                           Release, to the school district foster care liaison when the
                           foster care case closes.

SCHOOL
TRANSPORTATION

                      If it is determined that it is in the child’s best interest to remain in
                      the local school district of origin despite being placed outside of the
                      local school district, there may be an additional cost for
                      transportation. MDHHS and the local school district can assist with
                      this cost.

                      Additional cost is the cost that is above the average cost that the
                      local school district pays to transport per student.

                      Example: If the average cost of transportation per student for the
                      local school district is $10 per day, but the cost to transport a
                      student in foster care to their school of origin is $20 per day, only
                      the additional $10 is a part of this agreement and will be considered
                      for reimbursement, the district will be responsible for the first $10.

                      Transportation should be set up in collaboration with the school
                      district foster care liaison and the caregiver to identify the most
                      cost-effective plan. Options for transportation include, but are not
                      limited to:

                      •    Working with the local school district to re-route school buses.

                      •    Gas reimbursement to the foster parent, relative caregiver, or
                           volunteer driver.

                      •    Public transportation.

                      •    Taxi cab.

                                Taxi cabs should only be used when there are no other
                                available options and are found appropriate for the age
                                and maturity level of the child.




                                When utilizing a taxi cab, alternative more cost-effective
                                options should be considered on at least a quarterly basis.

                                The case manager should ask the local school district
                                what company they use and if there was a security
                                clearance completed.

                                If no security clearance has been completed, one must be
                                conducted, including a criminal history and central registry
                                clearance, on any driver that will be providing
                                transportation.

                                Payment to a cab will only be made for the time a child is
                                in the vehicle. MDHHS will not pay for time or mileage
                                back to the company location.

                      •   Uber or Lyft.

                                When utilizing Uber or Lyft, identify specific consistent
                                drivers and complete a security clearance.

                      The cost for transportation to the school of origin may be paid as
                      follows:

                      •   For a child who is in a title IV-E funded placement, MDHHS will
                          pay the entire additional cost of the transportation expense
                          while the local school district continues to pay the average
                          daily cost.

                      •   For a child who is in a non-title IV-E funded placement,
                          MDHHS and the local school district of origin split the
                          additional cost 50/50.

                      •   Local school districts and MDHHS staff may also collaborate to
                          agree on other payment options.

                      The MDHHS-5732, School Transportation Plan Agreement, should
                      be completed by the case manager in collaboration with the local
                      school district and signed by the local school district. The MDHHS-
                      5732, School Transportation Plan Agreement, will be uploaded into
                      the electronic case record, with the payment invoice once the
                      payment is being made.

                      If MDHHS and the local school district are unable to come to an
                      agreement on the transportation plan or payment, a formal dispute
                      may be filed. If MDHHS or the PAFC is filing a dispute, the foster
                      care supervisor will send information to the Education Policy




                      mailbox (MDHHS-EducationPolicy@michigan.gov). This should
                      include the nature of the dispute and contact information for all
                      parties, such as the foster care case manager, foster parent,
                      relative caregiver, or school district liaison.

 Ineligible
 Transportation
 Payment Reasons

                      MDHHS will not provide payment for transportation for the following
                      reasons:

                      •   If a child is placed within the district they are attending.

                      •   If a caregiver chooses to enroll a child in a district that is not
                          the district of origin or the district of residence, this is
                          considered a school-of-choice. In this situation, the caregiver
                          becomes responsible for the transportation.

                      •   Transportation that occurs after a foster care case is closed or
                          if a child is placed with a parent.

 School District
 Transportation
 Plan

                      Each local school district is required to have established
                      procedures that include details of how transportation is to be
                      maintained for children in foster care who attend their local school
                      district of origin. MDHHS county directors or their designees should
                      have input into this plan and be asked to review.

 Transportation
 Payment

                      School transportation to keep a child in the local school district of
                      origin is paid within the electronic case management system; see
                      FOM 903-09, Case Service Payments. The cost of transportation
                      cannot be the reason that a child does not remain in the local
                      school district of origin.

HOME AND PRIVATE
SCHOOLING

                      All children in foster care are required to attend a regular public or
                      private school program. Home schooling is not permitted. Online





                      and blended learning opportunities are not considered home
                      schooling and may be considered in special circumstances.

                      When a child is attending a private school at the time of removal,
                      they can remain enrolled at that private school when found in the
                      best interest, provided the parent agrees to continue any tuition
                      payment. MDHHS will not pay for private school tuition.

ONLINE EDUCATION
PROGRAMS

                      Children in foster care must be enrolled in regular public or private
                      school programs as often as possible. If the situation arises that an
                      alternative education program is required, online programs may be
                      considered for youth 16 years and older. All other options must be
                      considered prior to considering an online education program.

 Guidelines

                      Online education programs may be considered with the following
                      guidelines:

                      •   The decision to enroll a youth in an online education program
                          should be a team decision and a Family Team Meeting (FTM)
                          must be held.

                      •   If found to be in the best interest for a youth to enroll in an
                          online program, a plan must be formalized for how it will be
                          monitored by the case manager and foster care/relative
                          placement provider.

                          Note: This is considered typical parental supervision of
                          education and will not qualify for a Determination of Care
                          (DOC) level. If there are needs outside of monitoring, see FOM
                          903-03, Payment for Foster Family/Relative Care.

                      •   All information must be clearly documented in the case service
                          plan.

                      •   Online Education Best Interest Factors must be considered.

 Online Education
 Best Interest
 Factors

                      The best interest factors to consider when determining if an online
                      education program is appropriate for a foster youth include:




                      •   The youth’s preference.

                      •   The parent/legal guardian’s preference.

                      •   The local school district’s recommendation.

                      •   Whether the youth’s academic, physical, emotional, and social
                          needs will be met despite not being in a school setting.

                      •   The youth’s ability to make educational progress outside the
                          classroom.

                      •   If the youth is eligible for special education, the online program
                          must meet the youth’s specific educational needs as identified
                          in the IEP.

                      •   Whether the program offers a high school diploma or
                          Certificate of Completion.

                          Note: A youth will not qualify for college federal funding
                          through the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA)
                          if obtaining a Certificate of Completion.

                      •   The college the youth is planning to attend must accept the
                          diploma/certificate from the online program.

 Accepted
 Programs

                      All online programs that are offered through the local public-school
                      district must be considered first. If an online program within the
                      local public-school district is not available, these other options may
                      be considered:

                      •   Cyber Education Center.
                      •   Great Lakes Cyber Academy.
                      •   iCademy.
                      •   K-12.
                      •   Michigan Connections Academy.
                      •   Michigan Virtual Charter Academy.
                      •   Mosaica Online Academy of Michigan.
 Exception
 Requests

                      An exception request for a youth to attend online education must be
                      completed when either of the following circumstances applies:





                      •   A youth is under the age of 16, regardless of whether they are
                          attending an approved program.

                      •   Approval for a youth to attend an online program that is not on
                          the list of accepted programs or offered through the local
                          school district.

                      Age Exception

                      When completing an Online Education Program exception request
                      for a youth under the age of 16, include the following information:

                      •   An explanation of why the youth is not/will not be attending
                          school in-person and any expectation of them returning to in-
                          person education.

                      •   Justification for the appropriateness of the online program.

                      •   Documentation that an FTM was completed.

                      •   Documentation that the Online Education Best Interest Factors
                          in this item were considered.

                      •   Documentation that the county director or designee, or PAFC
                          director or designee, has signed in agreement with the
                          decision within two-weeks of the request.

                      Program Exception

                      When completing an exception request for a student to participate
                      in an online program that is not provided by the local public-school
                      district and is not on the approved list in this item, the following
                      must be documented:

                      •   Information about the program, including a contact person and
                          their telephone number or email.

                      •   Whether the program offers a Certification of Completion, a
                          GED, or a high school diploma.

                      •   If the student plans to attend college, the exception request
                          must include a statement acknowledging that the online
                          program will allow the youth to attend a post-secondary
                          institution.

                      Send all exception requests to the Education Policy mailbox
                      (MDHHS-EducationPolicy@michigan.gov).




SPECIAL
EDUCATION

                      The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) ensures that
                      all children with disabilities are entitled to a free appropriate public
                      education to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further
                      education, employment, and independent living.

 Individualized
 Education Plan

                      An IEP is a written plan for a student who has been determined to
                      have a disability through an evaluation by a multi-disciplinary team.
                      The IEP details the special education and related services the
                      student receives in the classroom. The IEP is developed at an IEP
                      Team Meeting with school staff and is reviewed once per year, or
                      more often if needed. Parents, legal guardians, or surrogate
                      parents are encouraged to attend, along with the student if
                      appropriate. Case managers are strongly encouraged to attend IEP
                      meetings, to gain a better understanding of the child's needs and
                      the services being provided.

                      Only the child's legal parent/guardian, foster parent, relative
                      caregiver, or an appointed education surrogate parent can sign an
                      IEP. Case managers (MDHHS or PAFC) or CCI staff cannot
                      sign an IEP as a parent.

                      The case manager must ensure all children that have an identified
                      special education need have an approved IEP on file and are
                      receiving the services outlined in the IEP.

                      Information regarding special education services and IEPs must be
                      documented in the electronic case record. This includes uploading
                      a copy of the IEP into the education section of the electronic case
                      record.

 Requesting an IEP

                      If a child displays signs that a disability may exist and has not been
                      identified as requiring special education services, a child’s parent,
                      guardian, caregiver, or case manager can request an evaluation to
                      be completed. In addition, anyone involved in a child's education,
                      including CCI or PAFC staff can make the request. The request
                      must be in writing and sent to the special education
                      coordinator/director at the child’s school. Once the request is
                      received, the school has no more than 10 school days to obtain
                      consent from the parents and begin the assessment process.



 Suspensions/
 Expulsions

                      A child with an active IEP can be removed from the classroom or
                      suspended from the school due to their behavior for short periods
                      of time without it affecting the provisions of their IEP. If a child is
                      removed from their classroom or the school for a period of more
                      than 10 consecutive days or experiences a series of removals that
                      accumulates to 10-days over the school year, the IEP team must
                      reconvene to determine if the child’s behavior is a manifestation of
                      their disability and consider changes to the IEP.

SURROGATE
PARENTS

                      Surrogate parents are appointed to represent children with disabili-
                      ties and developmental delays who have an IEP under the following
                      circumstances:

                      •   No parent can be identified.

                      •   The supervising agency, after documented reasonable efforts,
                          cannot discover the whereabouts of a parent.

                      •   The child is a ward of the state or court and parental rights
                          have been terminated.

                      Surrogate parents have all the rights of legal parents for
                      educational matters, including the authority to grant permission for
                      evaluation and placement, release information, and request
                      educational hearings. The primary responsibility of surrogate
                      parents is to ensure that children with disabilities are provided with
                      a free, appropriate public education.

                      An appointed surrogate parent must have received general
                      overview training on the developmental needs, service options, and
                      the legal rights of children eligible for special education services.
                      The surrogate parent has all rights accorded to parents under Part
                      C and/or Part B of IDEA and is to represent the child in all matters
                      pertaining to educational evaluation and assessment. The
                      surrogate parent has no rights outside Part C and Part B of IDEA.






 Surrogate Parent
 Selection
 Requirements

                      Surrogate parents may not be employed by an agency that is
                      involved in providing early intervention, special education services,
                      and/or general care for the child. This includes, MDHHS, PAFC,
                      and CCI employees.

                      Foster parents/relative caregivers are not considered paid
                      employees of MDHHS, or a PAFC provider; therefore, foster
                      parents and relative/unrelated caregivers may be appointed to
                      serve as surrogate parents upon the determination they meet the
                      criteria as stated in IDEA. In most instances, the child's foster
                      parents or relative caregiver should be appointed as the surrogate
                      parent unless they are unwilling or unable to serve in this capacity.

                      In selecting the surrogate parent, preference should be given to a
                      person who knows and understands the child and family's cultural,
                      religious, and linguistic background. Surrogate appointments will
                      last until one of the following occurs:

                      •   The surrogate resigns.

                      •   The appointment is terminated by the local MDHHS, the local
                          school district, or the child is no longer eligible for special
                          education services.

 Appointing a
 Surrogate

                      The local school district has the responsibility to have procedures in
                      place to appoint surrogate parents and to train any potential
                      surrogate parents so they have the knowledge and skills to
                      adequately represent the child as needed.

                      Within 30-calendar days of the determination that a child needs a
                      surrogate parent, the local school district must make reasonable
                      efforts to ensure one is appointed. Although appointing the
                      surrogate parent is the responsibility of the local school district, the
                      case manager must collaborate with the school to identify someone
                      who already has a relationship with the child, such as a relative or
                      family friend.






POST- SECONDARY
EDUCATION

                      All youth who have graduated or completed a GED program must
                      have access to appropriate educational and/or vocational
                      opportunities, including youth who are placed in a public, or a
                      private contracted CCI. Case managers must work with the
                      residential facility staff and the youth to ensure this occurs.

DOCUMENTATION
OF EDUCATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS

                      All educational information and related tasks, activities, and
                      contacts must be documented within the social work contacts, case
                      service plans, placement, and the education section of the
                      electronic case record.

                      The education section of the electronic case record should be
                      updated at the end of each school year to reflect when a child
                      completes a grade and advances to the next or if they are repeating
                      the same grade. Each school year should be end dated with an end
                      grade listed.

 Educational
 Information for
 Placement and
 Replacements

                      At the initial placement or any placement change, the narrative
                      within the case service plan must include the following:

                      •   Verification the child is enrolled in and attending school full-
                          time within five school days of initial placement or any
                          placement change, including while placed a CCI or emergency
                          placement.

                      •   The child’s placement was determined by considering the
                          appropriateness of the current educational setting and the
                          proximity to the school of origin.

                      •   The best interest factors and the input of the parent or legal
                          guardian, along with the district foster care liaison used to
                          determine the preferred school.

                      •   Discussion of the transportation plan.





                      •   Documentation that requests for prior education assessments
                          was completed within 30-calendar days of foster care
                          placement.

                      •   Documentation that prior education assessments were
                          considered when determining the current educational needs of
                          the child.

                      •   An initial assessment of the child’s educational needs and
                          strengths must be documented in the Child Assessment of
                          Needs and Strengths (CANS). Each child must be screened for
                          educational needs within 30-calendar days of their entry into
                          foster care. The case manager must use the CANS to assess
                          and document a child’s educational needs. The information
                          obtained from the sources listed above will assist with the
                          screening to identify the educational needs of the child and
                          services required to meet the child’s needs.

                      •   All other required updated educational information as outlined
                          below.

 Updated
 Educational
 Information

                      Updated school information is required in all case service plans.
                      The narrative must reflect the child’s current academic
                      achievements and challenges. All case service plans must
                      document or address the following items:

                      •   Document the child’s full-time elementary or secondary school
                          attendance with a statement that the child is a full-time student,
                          has completed secondary education, or is incapable of
                          attending school on a full-time basis due to the child’s medical
                          condition.

                      •   Name of current school and grade.

                      •   A reassessment of the child’s educational needs and strengths
                          is documented each report period in the CANS.

                      •   Special education information, if applicable.

                      •   Child’s current academic performance and behaviors in school.






                      •   Description of provided services from school, parent, foster
                          parent/caregiver and/or others to meet the child’s educational
                          needs.

 Caregiver
 Involvement

                      Supplemental activities provided by caregivers to assist with
                      educational participation, details for school collaboration, and the
                      actual tasks involved in educational interventions are required for
                      the child.

RESOURCES
                      •   DHS-942, School Notification and Education Records Release.
                      •   DHS-69, Foster Care/Juvenile Justice Action Summary.
                      •   Locating School Districts Liaisons in EEM.
LEGAL BASE



  Federal Laws

                      Every Student Succeeds Act, Title I, Part A of the Elementary
                      and Secondary Education Act of 1965, PL 114-95

                      Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), passed in December 2015,
                      amends the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), and
                      includes protections to support students who are in foster care. It
                      requires state and local level education systems collaborate with
                      child welfare agencies to ensure the educational stability of children
                      and youth in foster care.

                      Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions
                      Act, PL 110-351

                      The Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions
                      Act requires states to promote educational stability and appropriate
                      school attendance for children in foster care.

                      Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 USC 1400 et
                      seq.

                      The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is a federal
                      law enacted to meet the needs of persons with disabilities. IDEA
                      ensures that students with disabilities receive appropriate education
                      through the development and implementation of an Individualized
                      Education Program (IEP). The IEP is designed to meet the




                      assessed educational needs of each student with disabilities and
                      assures students will be educated within the least restrictive
                      environment appropriate to meet their needs.

                      Public Law 91-230, [20 USC 1400 et. seq.] the federal Individuals
                      with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) was enacted to meet the
                      needs of persons with disabilities.

                      Part B [20 USC 1411-1419] covers children aged three to age 21
                      with disabilities and ensures that they will have available special
                      education and related services to meet their unique educational
                      needs.

                      Part C [20 USC 1431-1445] covers infants under the age of three
                      who have established conditions associated with developmental
                      delay or who are developmentally delayed and ensures early inter-
                      vention services to the eligible child and the child's family.

                      Several procedural safeguards are provided under Part B and Part
                      C that involve parental notice and consent. One of these procedural
                      safeguards is the appointment of a surrogate parent if the child's
                      legal parent cannot be located.

                      Uninterrupted Scholars Act, PL 112-278

                      The Uninterrupted Scholars Act became effective in January 2013.
                      This Act makes key amendments to the Family Educational Rights
                      and Privacy Act (FERPA) that improves information sharing
                      between education and child welfare agencies. The Act allows
                      schools to release a child’s education records to child welfare agen-
                      cies without the prior written consent of the parents or court order.

 State Law

                      The Revised School Code, 1976 PA 451

                      MCL 380.1561- compulsory attendance at public school; enrollment
                      dates; exceptions.

                      MCL 380.1135(4)- within 14 days after enrolling a transfer student,
                      the school shall request in writing directly from the student's previ-
                      ous school a copy of his or her school record. Any school that com-
                      piles records for each student in the school and that is requested to
                      forward a copy of a transferring student's record to the new school
                      shall comply within 30 days after receipt of the request.






                      MCL 380.1148(2)- if a child who is under court jurisdiction under
                      section 2(b) of chapter XIIA of the probate code of 1939, 1939 PA
                      288, MCL 712A.2, is placed in foster care, a school district shall
                      allow the child to enroll in and attend the appropriate grade in the
                      school selected by the department of health and human services or
                      a child placing agency without regard to whether or not the child is
                      residing in that school district. If the selection results in a child
                      transferring to another school, the child's school records shall be
                      transferred as provided under section 1135.

                      MCL 380.1310 (2)- If an individual is expelled pursuant to this
                      section, it is the responsibility of that individual and of his or her
                      parent or legal guardian to locate a suitable educational program
                      and to enroll the individual in such a program during the expulsion.
                      The office for safe schools in the department shall compile
                      information on and catalog existing alternative education programs
                      or schools and nonpublic schools that may be open to enrollment of
                      individuals expelled under this section and pursuant to section
                      1311(2) or 1311a and shall periodically distribute this information to
                      school districts for distribution to expelled individuals.

                      MCL 380.1311 - A school board, school district superintendent,
                      school building principal, or another school district official if
                      designated by the school board, may authorize, or order the
                      suspension or expulsion from school of a pupil guilty of gross
                      misdemeanor or persistent disobedience if, in the judgment of the
                      school board or its designee, as applicable, the interest of the
                      school is served by the authorization or order. If there is reasonable
                      cause to believe that the pupil is a student with a disability, and the
                      school district has not evaluated the pupil in accordance with rules
                      of the superintendent of public instruction to determine if the pupil is
                      a student with a disability, the pupil shall be evaluated immediately
                      by the intermediate school district of which the school district is
                      constituent.

                      Michigan Administrative Rules

                      Department of Education Special Education Programs and
                      Services, R 340-1701-340-1862.

POLICY CONTACT
                      Questions about this policy item may be directed to the Education
                      Policy mailbox (MDHHS-EducationPolicy@michigan.gov).





